The second boy was a trader.
Jakov will make a fine peddler, the farmer said.
But the farmer, of course, listened to the older brothers.
Stefan is nothing but a farmer!
Mihailo said.
Tell me a story!
He knows more than any one!
You talk like the daughter of a farmer!
I wish I were the daughter of a farmer!
And think of her ingratitude to yourself, O Tsar!
A nice thing for a princess to say!
The Tsar when he heard this fell into an awful rage.
Send the Princess to me at once.
What do you mean, funny old men and silly old women?
Now whenever the Tsar began roaring and saying, Wow!
I want to be amused!
I want to laugh!
A fine princess you are!
Go straight back to the schoolroom and behave yourself!
She was really very naughty.
Lock that young woman in her chamber!
This will never do!
My dear, the Tsar said, I was joking.
You may have anything you want.
But I want to be amused as well as educated!
What was the Tsar to do?
A nice lot you are!
I have a good mind to have you all thrown into the dungeon!
And I, another said, as a teacher of languages!
And I as a teacher of philosophy!
Between you all you have about killed my poor child!
Apparently not one of them did, for no one answered.
Not even you?
Poor child!
No wonder she wants a change!
Oh, what fools you all are in spite of your learning!
In despair the Tsar sent out his heralds again.
Stefan ought to go, Mihailo suggested.
Everybody else does!
He spoke sneeringly but Stefan only smiled.
Perhaps I will go.
What a joke that would be!
He grows more foolish all the time!
Then he knelt beside the bed and kissed her hand.
Yes, Princess, my little sister, Militza.
I am, the Princess said, with a catch in her voice.
The foolisher, the better!
Did you hear what Stefan said?
He said he saddled his rooster!
Young man, continue.
There he was in a field of millet harnessed to a plow.
I shouted to the man who was driving him.
Is that so?
I took the bag and tied it securely on the bee.
Then I unsaddled the rooster and mounted the bee.
He took the rooster by the hand!
Let the young man finish!
With the skins I made two leather bottles.
Then I rode home.
I no sooner arrived home than my father was born.
We must have holy water for the christening, I said.
I suppose I must go to heaven to fetch some.
But how was I to get there?
I thought of my millet.
What do you want for it?
So there I was with no way of getting down.
I thought of my hair.
So he motioned Stefan to continue.
The heat was so great that they had to stop work.
Certainly, I said.
After that it was easy enough to fetch them some water.
But where is your head?
Then, Stefan, what did you do?
What did you do?
Yes, beautiful nonsense!
You are a fine lad and I shall never forget you.
He amuses me and I like him.
My daughter marry the son of a farmer!
What could the poor Tsar do?
You blockhead!
Neighboring kings, indeed, and their good-for-nothing sons!
Do you mean Stefan, the Laughing Prince?
I wonder is she really as beautiful as all that!
I wonder where she lives!
He thought about her until he could think of nothing else.
Peerless Beauty!
Peerless Beauty!
I will go to my uncle, the young man said.
Perhaps he will tell me where I can find Peerless Beauty.
His uncle looked at him gravely and shook his head.
Put her out of your mind, they said.
These enchanted maidens are a snare to young men.
At the door of the hut sat a poor old woman.
She held out her hand as he passed and begged an alms.
May God reward you!
It were better for you to turn back than to go on!
Danilo declared.
By afternoon he reached the castle.
What do you want?
I want to see Peerless Beauty.
Have you gold?
Danilo showed them his bag of ducats.
Now, my son, are you satisfied?
Oh, granny!
Danilo raved.
Such a finger!
I must go back again!
It was a big old house with garrets and cellars.
So he hunted upstairs and down.
One day he came upon a funny looking little cap.
I wonder whose this was, he thought to himself.
He went to a mirror and tried the cap on.
Then a strange thing happened.
The moment the cap touched his head, Danilo disappeared.
Beauty cried.
Beauty said.
I feel as though some one were looking at me.
Who is Danilo?
The youth whom you have been treating so cruelly.
But though you have treated me cruelly, I love you still!
If you love me still, the maiden said, let me see you.
Instantly she clapped it on her head and disappeared.
Take out this young man and drive him forth!
Let him return when he has another treasure to offer me!
So the guards dragged Danilo out and drove him away.
Perhaps there are other treasures hidden away, he thought.
What does our master wish?
Magic pitcher?
And am I your master?
You may disappear now, Danilo said.
I will rub the pitcher when I need you.
Then he asked her to carry a message to Peerless Beauty.
Trust me this time, Danilo said.
I have treated you cruelly, she said.
Now I am in your power, do with me what you will.
Weep no more, dear lady!
You have nothing to fear from me!
I love you!
I am your slave!
The Peerless one slowly dried her tears.
It looks like any old pitcher!
Please, Danilo, let me see it in my own hands.
Seize that wretch!
He fell upon them ravenously and ate bunch after bunch.
Fine grapes these are!
Who wants my fresh sweet grapes!
Instantly some horns grew out on her head.
Oh, dear, what shall I do?
But the huckster had disappeared.
What could Peerless Beauty do now?
The horns stayed firmly rooted.
Are you one more quack?
Here they are in this chest.
Is that all?
I do remember another misdeed, she confessed.
She gave Danilo the pitcher and he hid it in his shirt.
Is that all?
Yes, that is all.
Then he pretended to get angry.
I told you I could not cure you unless you confessed all!
What a wonderful man you are, Danilo!
But I do love you!
Danilo cried.
I do love you!
That was enough.
There he still lives happy and prosperous.
The Princess alone was uninterested.
Why such haste?
In my youth, she said, girls were not like this.
The tower was high up among the treetops.
You beautiful thing!
How I love you!
Did the Pigeon really speak?
You beautiful creature!
He was so handsome that all the Princess could say was, Oh!
He came slowly towards her and knelt before her.
Dear Princess, he said, do not be frightened.
Love me still if you can, for I love you.
Would you rather I were still a pigeon?
I like you ever so much better this way!
She had never imagined that any kiss could be so wonderful!
You know milk is very good for the complexion.
Milk indeed!
What ails this Princess?
Her father looked at her severely.
Is that the way for a princess to talk?
My poor child!
Think no more about this Pigeon Prince!
But he is my love!
If it must be so, it must be.
But that afternoon the Pigeon did not come.
Unless I find him life will not be worth the living.
So do not oppose me, father, but help me.
But nowhere could she find any trace of him.
Think no more about him.
But the Princess shook her head.
The King agreed to this.
What story could you tell the Princess?
She turned around and what do you think she saw?
A rooster in wooden shoes with a basket under his wing!
How strange!
A rooster with wooden shoes!
Then he hurried home to a little house.
The girl slipped in after him and hid behind the door.
He put a big bowl on the table and filled it with milk.
It must be my love!
Thank God I have found him at last!
Presently twelve pigeons flew in.
Then the eleven went away laughing arm in arm.
What did people mean by saying such a thing?
Any girl would!
The Princess laughed.
Of course not!
The oldest was a selfish overbearing fellow.
That booby!
Janko suggested.
If anybody is to ask him, I will!
My eyes, indeed!
Father is waiting for you.
Now please tell me for I, too, want to know.
But Janko stood perfectly still.
Thank God, he said, I have one son who is not a coward!
Father, Janko said, dry your weeping eye!
But, brothers, Janko begged, please let me go, too!
You can stay home and look after the farm!
How are we going to get rid of the Booby?
Do you agree?
Yes, the other two said, we agree.
Then suppose Janko take the left-hand road.
So now they really had something to curse about.
You poor little creature, Janko said, are you hungry?
Who are you and where are you going?
Janko answered the Fox simply and truthfully.
The king of this country has a wonderful garden.
We are close to the garden now.
To get to the Grape-Vine you will have to pass them all.
Now as you approach each watch look carefully.
Under no condition touch the golden spade.
Now, Janko, do you understand?
Yes, Janko thought he understood.
He saw the Grape-Vine at once.
We found him trying to steal your Magic Grape-Vine!
My Magic Grape-Vine!
With that Janko was dismissed and turned out of the garden.
Trying to steal my Golden Apple-Tree, is he?
What do you want with my Golden Apple-Tree, young man?
With that Janko was dismissed and turned out of the garden.
I wonder, dear Little Fox, will you help me again?
He reached at last the stall of the Golden Horse.
Just think of it!
I have no excuse to make for him.
But he did.
With that Janko was dismissed and led out of the stable.
Where are your wits!
Now what shall we do?
Dear Little Fox, will you help me this one time more?
But this will have to be the last time.
She gave Janko her hand and he helped her to her feet.
The Golden Maiden at once begged them to keep her.
I want to stay with Janko who has rescued me!
Perhaps I can help you, the Little Fox said.
Exchange me for the Golden Horse and make off at once.
Janko did this very thing.
You shall pay for this with your life!
And he had him executed at once.
But how else can I get the Golden Apple-Tree?
Janko asked.
Perhaps I can help you, the Little Fox said.
See my Golden Horse!
And he ordered the courtier to be executed at once.
And he ordered the courtier to be executed at once.
That Booby!
Then where will we be?
Brother, whispered the first, let us make away with him!
Suspecting nothing Janko went.
Where can he be?
And do you know why?
As she spoke she changed into a lovely maiden.
Good-by, Janko, she said.
Marry Janko!
No, not one!
So Janko lived happy and prosperous.
It was known as the golden apple-tree.
Who has stolen my golden apples?
His brothers jeered and the Tsar shook his head.
Just before midnight he awoke.
Yes, she promised him.
Suddenly the Prince remembered the golden apples.
The peafowl in the tree were about to eat the last of them.
Then with a scissors she snipped off a lock.
Unless I go out in the world and find her I shall die.
They come here every morning to bathe in the lake.
What can you want with them?
Die, indeed!
Instantly sleep overcame the Prince.
Then and not till then did the Prince awaken.
Where are they now?
Are they gone?
I tried to arouse you, too, but you kept on sleeping.
How could I have fallen asleep at such a time?
The next morning the same thing happened.
Where are they?
Have I been asleep again?
The serving man pretended to be deeply grieved.
What can she mean?
Now I understand!
You are the nail of which my dear love warns me!
Ah, he said, you mean the nine princesses.
The ninth awaits you.
Then she will be made queen.
The Prince thanked the hermit and rode on.
Sure enough the Princess was his own dear love.
Under the palace are twelve cellars.
Here are the keys to them all.
If you do a heavy misfortune may fall upon both of us.
A cup of water!
I am dying of thirst!
Now give me another cup!
I am dying of thirst!
Alas, my dear one, what have you done?
The Princess sighed and shook her head.
How, my loved one, can we escape?
But the Prince insisted that they make the attempt.
So she mounted with him and off they went.
However, I warn you not to try this foolishness again!
What was the Prince to do now?
But I warn you if you come again I will tear you to pieces.
We must find out where the dragon got his.
How happy we are here, just you and I!
He seems to think my horse is an ordinary horse.
The Prince would have a hard time getting him!
Any one who attempts this and fails she kills.
Oh, that feels good, my dear!
How would she do that?
Yet this is the magic horse and brother to mine.
Take one of my scales, the fish said.
Then if ever you need my help just rub the scale.
Then he rode on.
Help me, brother, help me!
Another one that wants service with the Old Woman, eh?
Yes, said the Prince.
You know the conditions?
On every picket but one there was a grinning human skull.
I want my skull!
The Old Woman gave a wicked laugh.
You see, she said, we were expecting you!
To make sure that she would not escape him, he mounted her.
In despair he looked in all directions.
At one end of the meadow was a pond.
She may have gone there to drink, he said to himself.
At the pond he saw a hoofprint.
Can I help you?
Aye, brother, that I can!
That will bring her!
The Prince did this.
Do you hear me?
Can I help you?
Aye, brother, that I can!
That will bring her!
In the morning the Prince drove them home to the Old Woman.
What is it, brother?
Can I help you?
Aye, brother, that I can!
That will bring her!
You have won the reward and you are worthy of it.
Choose now the finest horse in my stable.
It is yours.
But at each the Prince shook his head.
I am only a poor adventurer, he said.
Such horses as these are too fine for me.
That is the one I choose.
He drew his sword and lifted it threateningly.
I want my skull!
We shall have glorious adventures together!
The wonder horse rose on the wind and off they went.
Why do you carry such a monster?
Throw him from you and be rid of him forever!
And that was the end of that dragon!
Where is the prince?
So he mounted his horse and rode up the river.
His attendant waited for his return but waited in vain.
Later he returned to the Old Mill from another direction.
He found an old woman sitting in front of it.
Do you live here?
You know I thought the Old Mill was deserted.
The old woman looked at him and shook her head gloomily.
Deserted indeed!
A horrible monster!
He takes the form of a hare and lures people into the mill.
Then he captures them.
You have no idea what a strong evil monster the dragon is.
No, indeed!
That would be too dangerous.
I keep it in the hearth yonder.
O beautiful hearth!
How happy are the ashes that cover your stones!
The dragon laughed with amusement.
Again the dragon laughed.
I keep it far away, he said.
A dragon lives at the bottom of the lake.
My strength is in the sparrow.
Let any one kill the sparrow and I should die that instant.
But I am safe.
Oh, I tell you, old woman, your master is a clever one!
Are you sure you want to be a shepherd?
Send the youth to me, he ordered.
Do you really want to be my shepherd?
The Youngest Prince said yes, he did.
So you know about that lake, too!
What else do you know?
And still you want to try your luck?
It would be dreadful if he never returned!
But this is not the time or the place for sentiment.
We must consider first the welfare of the royal sheep.
You shall have them all, the Tsar promised.
Even the Tsar was pleased.
Her eyes were downcast and he saw that she was trembling.
Do not be afraid, dear Princess, he said to her.
Nothing shall harm you, I promise that!
Then he fell to earth with such a thud that he burst.
Out of his body sprang a wild boar.
Out of the boar jumped a rabbit.
Out of the rabbit flew a pigeon.
Instantly the shepherd unloosed the falcon.
He cut open the pigeon and found the sparrow.
Your brothers?
Cut the saplings and strike the root.
A heavy iron door leading down into the dungeon will open.
She tried to speak but could not at first.
Such feasting as the townspeople had!
Such music and dancing!
In fact, he said, he had suspected as much from the first!
I took the sparrow and killed it.
So you are free now, granny, to return to your home.
And soon all those other poor captives will be free.
He cut them off and struck the old root.
Sure enough a heavy iron door opened.
Any kind of a child!
She used to play about her father as he worked.
Let me help you, mother, the frog daughter said.
Who is singing?
Surely, old man, he said, there is some one singing!
It is a lovely girl, I know it is!
I mean what I say!
Are you sure you would?
A Prince wants to marry you!
I love her singing and I love her.
Yes, my Prince, the frog girl said, I will.
But I must not shame you by hopping to Court in the dust.
I must ride.
Early the next morning the frog girl prayed to the Sun.
O golden Sun, she said, I need your help!
This is no place for frogs!
So they let her ride through the gate.
They were just ordinary girls both of them.
The first girl had a rose in her hand.
The second girl had a carnation.
This is something like!
See how beautiful she is!
This is certainly the most beautiful mosque in the world!
What can I do?
The Sultan sighed and shook his head.
Perhaps he will tell us what is lacking.
I cannot tell you that, the Dervish droned.
So grieve no more, father.
Upon the stone of the left-hand road nothing was written.
And I will take the middle road, the second brother cried.
Here, let me show you.
You have been very kind to me, she said.
I am looking for the Nightingale Gisar.
The Nightingale Gisar is not here.
Then I must go farther, the Youngest Brother said.
This the wild woman begged him not to do.
Turn back while you can.
So he left the wild woman and crossed the mountains.
He went on and on until he was footsore and weary.
Be off, young man!
You will burn yourself!
But how else can I brush aside the glowing embers?
What are you doing wandering about in this wild country?
The old Lion shook his head.
I have never heard of the Nightingale Gisar.
He has never sung in this wild place.
Turn back, young man, and seek him elsewhere.
That is as God wills, the Youngest Brother said.
He put these three things in his bag as trophies.
God bless you, granny!
Can you give me a bite of supper and shelter for the night?
The old woman shook her head.
My boy, you had better not stop here.
He blew out the lighted ones and lit the others.
I had better wait for them.
Here, O father, they said, is the Nightingale Gisar!
And your Youngest Brother, the Sultan asked, where is he?
The Youngest?
The Sultan immediately sent for his two sons.
They came but still the bird was silent.
What can he mean?
Why does he not sing when I and my two sons come to pray?
Him I shall have executed or let live as it pleases me.
The Sultan himself had finally to decide between them.
You would lack the courage to face the perils of the way!
Unhappily I listened to your brother!
See now the awful result of this mistake!
I know not where my Third Son is.
What shall I do?
Perhaps it is he the Dervish means.
No, said the youth, I shall go as a beggar or not at all.
Then why are you dressed as a beggar?
Yet when I went to the mosque it always sang.
Yes, Princess, it was.
Behold, O warriors, your future lord!
Allah be praised!
I live far from here, the Vampire said.
Perhaps you had better take him.
What an awful place!
Let me out!
Let you out, indeed!
Here now, drink this.
This is my one chance to get back to earth!
What shall I do now?
They hunted for hours and all they could find was a chest.
Waste no more time over it, the Prince said at last.
You lovely creature!
Now he had in his employ a great burly Blackamoor.
The Prince was utterly grief-stricken and refused to eat.
It breaks my heart to see you sad and unhappy!
Can you cook?
Then the old woman came.
Wait a minute!
Those beans look good!
Then he ate the beans, every last one of them!
Where do you live, granny?
Do you live alone?
Now the Prince knew what he wanted to know.
Foolish child!
This made the old woman feel nervous.
Then make me a loaf, granny.
What was the old woman to say to that?
Why are you hiding from me?
At last the Prince agreed to this.
God heard his prayer and sent an angel to him in a dream.
There you will find a brook.
She will speak to you but do you be careful not to answer.
If you say a word to her she will be able to bewitch you.
Take the comb and do as she asks.
Then flee as fast as you can.
Good day to you!
The man nodded and took the comb.
What are you doing?
Give me back my one red hair!
She jumped to her feet and ran swiftly after him.
She stooped and picked it up and examined it awhile.
This time he dropped the red handkerchief.
It must be of great value, he thought to himself.
But the poor man insisted that this was not enough.
One hundred golden ducats not enough for one red hair!
One thousand golden ducats!
And what do you suppose the Tsar did with the hair?
They took turns guarding it.
The Angel thanked him and departed.
Take this one, the second brother said.
It is mine and I can give it away.
The Angel thanked the second brother and departed.
The brothers agreed and they all started out together.
You have your wish, the Angel said.
You have your wish, the Angel said.
Then he and the youngest brother went on their way.
Now, my son, the Angel said, you, too, may make one wish.
I want but one thing, father.
I pray heaven to grant me a truly pious wife.
That is my only wish.
A truly pious wife!
My boy, you have asked the hardest thing of all!
Two kings and now this young man all on the same day!
How am I going to decide among them?
Let heaven decide!
Be off with you, you old vagabond!
Go back to your pear tree.
A morsel of cheese, you lazy good-for-nothing!
Go back to your pear tree!
He found them in great poverty living in a mean little hut.
God be with you!
We are poor ourselves, the youngest brother said.
But come in, you are welcome to share what we have.
God be praised!
He raised his staff, made the sign of the cross, and lo!
The older son was overbearing, greedy, and covetous.
The younger brother was gentle and kind.
That fool would only squander his inheritance!
What if I am?
God bless you, brother!
No, brother, the other said, you are wrong.
Are you sure of that?
Well, then, let us make a wager.
Do you agree?
Yes, brother, I agree.
Of course Evil is stronger than Good in this world.
Now, sneered the older one, are you convinced?
No, brother, I am not.
You do, do you?
The more fool you!
Now let God take care of you if He can!
As for me I put my trust in the Devil!
May God forgive you for speaking so!
Nothing can harm me!
There I can bathe my wounds and sit in the shade.
For the rest, God will have to take care of you.
With that he led him over to the fir tree and left him.
A company of Vilas were bathing and playing as they bathed.
Human voices are never half so lovely.
Yes, they must be Vilas from the mountains and the woods.
Ho, sisters!
How did that fool get back his sight?
Sisters, they cried to each other, have you heard?
Who has spied on us?
Let us see if there is any one there to-night!
So that was the end of the wicked older brother.
So you see Good is stronger than Evil in this world.
It was writhing and trembling in fear.
Help me, brother!
Help me and I will reward you richly!
I swear I will!
Will you kill me as a reward for my kindness?
Nay, the snake said.
Do not be afraid.
I will not injure you.
Do as I tell you and you will have nothing to regret.
My father is the Tsar of the Snakes.
Take me to him and he will reward you for rescuing me.
Have no fear about your flocks.
Nothing will happen to them in your absence.
He rescued me.
Then he told the Tsar of the Snakes the whole story.
Ask of me anything I can grant and it is yours.
It is too dangerous a gift!
Ask something else, anything else!
No, the shepherd insisted.
Give me that or nothing!
What must be, must be.
Then you will understand the language of the animals.
Am I dreaming again?
So now the shepherd was able to set up in life for himself.
The years went by and he grew prosperous and rich.
At midnight some wolves came prowling around the flocks.
But there was one old sheepdog that nothing could tempt.
The shepherds were surprised.
Not so fast!
Have pity on me and go more slowly.
What are you laughing at?
Nothing, the farmer said.
And the wife burst into tears.
Then what were you laughing at?
Die the next moment!
Stuff and nonsense!
He lay down at the foot of the coffin and howled.
You shameless animal!
The rooster clucked scornfully.
Look at me!
They do not!
Then I eat it while they stand there and admire me!
No, no, old dog, I have no patience with the master!
Very well, then!
Take this and this and this!
Do you want to injure me!
One of them was very rich.
He had houses and fields and barns.
The third brother was industrious but very poor.
He worked early and late and never took a holiday.
He came in a brokendown cart driving a wheezy old horse.
It was cold and raining and night was falling.
He knocked on the door and begged for shelter.
Come in, brother, said the Poor Man.
Where do you live?
Yes, the Poor Man promised, I will if ever I have time.
But he and the cart had disappeared.
I hope he has no accident on account of those bolts!
Four golden horse-shoes!
I ought to return them and the silver bolts at once!
Silver bolts!
Golden horse-shoes!
Take us home with you and let us see them!
The tracks of his cart!
Show us the tracks of his cart!
Of course not!
Of course not!
It was cunningly constructed of timbers beautifully hewn.
The rich man had never seen such wood used on a bridge.
I never saw so many angry fighting animals!
He tried the rivets, he shook the railing.
What a strange country this is!
Then he drove homewards as fast as he could.
My son will now be a richer man than my brother!
I wonder are they still there.
It was the Beggar himself who opened the gate.
I have been waiting for you all these years!
Come in and I will show you my Garden.
So the Poor Man went inside.
The Beggar smiled.
Now he has his reward.
Thank you, the Poor Man said, I will.
But let me first go out and see how my donkey is.
Very well, the Beggar said, go.
But be sure to come back for I shall be waiting for you.
But the donkey was gone.
He must have started home, the Poor Man thought.
So he started back afoot the way he had come.
He went on and on but saw no donkey.
He must have got all the way home, he thought.
He asked the people he met and they knew nothing about it.
And they knew nothing about him, either, not even his name.
And nobody even knew about his sons.
I better go back to my friend the Beggar and stay with him.
No one else wants me.
It was all he could do to give one faint little knock.
But the Beggar heard him and came running to let him in.
And then he knew that he was in the Garden of Paradise.
THE HAT-SHAKING DANCE and Other Tales from the Gold Coast.
I have even gone further.
Whence comest thou, maiden?
And in all our pleasure we have no strife.
For save Connla alone, none saw the Fairy Maiden.
To whom art thou talking, my son?
But as he ate it grew again and always kept whole.
Only wives and maidens dwell there.
I wish I was the same as you.
My horse, and bridle, and saddle!
My horse, and bridle, and saddle!
I am surely, said Guleesh.
Hie over cap!
Not a know, says Guleesh.
Nobody could see her, for that word made her invisible.
My horse, my bridle, and saddle!
Hie over cap!
Hie over cap!
I call and cross you to myself, in the name of God!
What good have we now out of our journey to France.
Would you not sooner stay with me than with them?
She gave him no answer.
It cannot be, said Guleesh, that you are dumb.
But ubbubboo!
Who is she, or how did you get her?
My horse, and bridle, and saddle!
My horse, and bridle, and saddle!
Guleesh, my boy, are you here with us again?
How are you getting on with your woman?
It was a good trick you played on us last year?
Perhaps be likes to be looking at her, said another voice.
He is an omadawn.
Guleesh was ready to die with satisfaction and delight.
Thunder and fire!
Where did I get it, is it?
Why, I made it.
And what do you think I made it of?
I made it of heath.
Did you never hear tell of the Danes?
Will you give a body a taste of your beer?
And the Lepracaun swore right away not to touch it.
Who is there?
I am the Witch of one Horn, was answered.
And they said to her, Take a sieve and bring water in it.
And she did so.
Open, open, wood and trees and beam!
Open, open, cake that we have made and mingled with blood!
There was at that time a king over every fifth of Erin.
The servants locked the door, and they went away.
They made the holes, then they laid hands on the horse.
The king heard the noise.
Go and look well about him.
The servants went out, and they went to their hiding holes.
The servants rummaged well, and did not find a thing.
They returned and they told this.
The gillies came, and the king went with them.
The king followed the tracks of the men, and he found them.
I am, O king, without question, and necessity made me come.
Yes, Conall, it is well enough, but come in, said the king.
I will tell a case as hard in which I was, said Conall.
I found the cow, and took her with us.
There fell a shower of snow.
I was amazed that my name was known to the cats themselves.
And surely, oh king, there was catterwauling between them.
I took myself off as hard as I might into the wood.
They set themselves in order for moving.
Then I gave the third shout.
And then I came home.
Conall, said the king, you are full of words.
I knew not how I should get out of this.
It was terrible for me to be there till I should die.
But I see that you are one-eyed.
I killed the buck.
I went out.
I drew a dirk.
And as a sign now look, the finger is off me.
Yes, indeed, Conall, you are wordy and wise, said the king.
I see the finger is off you.
I went to hunt.
I did not know now what I should do.
I came out on the top of a hill.
I told her myself word upon word how I came.
As fortune favoured me, the brute slept beside the caldron.
There I was scalded by the bottom of the caldron.
I said I was.
I left the skin of my hips behind me, but I came out.
I drew the dart as best I could, and I set it in his eye.
Is it you, said she, that were there?
Then they took great joy.
They were good friends evermore.
Some of your best whisky, says he to the landlord.
The landlord opened his eyes, as you may fancy.
Will you take a gold piece?
Good-evening, Hudden.
Will you lend me your best pair of scales?
Good-evening, Dudden.
And who else should I mean?
How do you know that?
In they walked without an If you please or By your leave.
Hudden nudged Dudden, and Dudden winked at Hudden.
Good-evening, kind friends.
Their weight in gold.
That was all the tanner said, and back he went to his yard.
Hides to sell!
Fine fresh hides to sell!
Out came the cobbler.
How much for your hides, my men?
Their weight in gold.
Is it making game of me you are!
Who deluded you?
But it was no use talking.
Pay for it he must, and should.
There was an inn by the roadside.
If Hudden was willing, so was Dudden.
But nobody heeded what he said.
They are bothering the life out of me to marry her.
Do you see that now!
Jewels, do you say?
True for you, said Dudden.
Is it you, Donald?
Look at the cattle.
You always were a neighbourly lad, Donald.
There is plenty for all there, so come along with me.
Off they trudged, with a light heart and an eager step.
They never came back.
Maybe they got too fat, like the cattle.
The husband was careful never to strike her again.
He had a wife, but no family.
Are you doing any soothsaying?
Yes, I am doing a little.
Are you in need of soothsaying?
Well, I will do soothsaying for you.
What kind of soothsaying do you want?
Well, I am going out, and when I return, I will tell you.
This was done.
But let them go past to the bosky glade.
There is no shelter or house for them here.
What men are these you refer to?
Well, I will tell you, young woman, said the hunter.
What like are these men when seen, if we were to see them?
And, King of Light and Sun!
What is the reason of your journey?
Well, I did see her, said the hunter.
And will you direct me to where she dwells?
It is I, Connachar, King of Ulster.
And she gave the promise.
What did they see coming but three men a-journeying.
They did so.
So he prepared a great and gleeful feast.
We will go with you, said Naois.
We will, said his brothers.
We will, said Daring Drop.
We will, said Hardy Holly.
We will, said Fiallan the Fair.
He looked in through the bicker-hole on the door-leaf.
Gelban returned back to the palace of King Connachar.
What has happened to you, Gelban?
The pursuit is coming, said Deirdre.
We, the three sons of Ferchar Mac Ro.
What is the good of that?
Come you, Arden, and sit on my right shoulder, said Naois.
I cannot eat or smile henceforth.
The men did as she told them.
It was done as the king bade, and the pit closed.
What news the day?
He came to the axe.
What news to-day?
He came to the flag.
What news today?
He came to the water.
What news to-day?
He came to the deer.
What news to-day?
He came to the hound.
What news to-day?
He came to the butter.
What news to-day?
He came to the cat.
What news to-day?
He came to the cow.
What news to-day?
He came to the threshers.
What news to-day?
He came to the miller.
What news to-day?
A crow went flying by him, over his head.
Why, Gold-tree, your daughter.
Silver-tree went home, blind with rage.
The king now agreed to this, and they went abroad.
Why, Gold-tree, your daughter.
It is a year since I ate her heart and liver.
She is married to a great prince abroad.
The long-ship was put in order, and they went away.
The prince was out hunting on the hills.
Gold-tree knew the long-ship of her father coming.
Why, Gold-tree, your daughter.
It is a year since I put the poisoned stab into her finger.
The long-ship was put in order, and they went away.
The prince was out hunting on the hills.
Silver-tree came ashore.
They had only to carry her home a dead corpse and bury her.
I left them there.
God save you, says the king to the young man.
True for you, says the king.
Oh, never mind, says St. Kavin.
Oh, never mind, says he, I know more than that.
Blur-an-agers, how came ye to know about my goose?
After some more talk the king says, What are you?
Is it a tinker you are?
I will, says the king.
Honour bright!
Honour bright!
And do you say no more nor that?
As true as the sun, says the king.
Oh, queen of heaven!
I am, says Saint Kavin.
Well, you know the difference now, says the saint.
I will depart and bear away thy honour with me.
Then said Kay, Rash chieftain!
Thereupon Kay rose up.
Very subtle was Kay.
And Arthur called to Kynthelig the guide.
Go thou upon this expedition with the Chieftain.
He was the best of footmen and the best of knights.
Evil love were this.
Whoso beheld was filled with her love.
They did so, and he promised, them an answer on the morrow.
Then said he, A cursed ungentle son-in-law, truly.
I shall ever walk the worse for his rudeness.
This poisoned iron pains me like the bite of a gad-fly.
Cursed be the hearth whereon it was heated!
A cursed ungentle son-in-law, truly.
As long as I remain alive my eyesight will be the worse.
Cursed be the fire in which it was forged.
And they went to meat.
It is I, answered Kilhuch.
I will do so, said he.
For it would be useless to seek for him.
He is his cousin.
Go forward.
Go, Eidoel, likewise with my men in search of thy cousin.
Achieve ye this adventure for me.
Say, knowest thou aught of Mabon?
And the owl said, If I knew I would tell you.
And a race of men came and rooted it up.
My wings, are they not withered stumps?
However, I will guide you to the place where he is.
Said Gwrhyr, Who is it that laments in this house of stone?
And the dogs were let loose upon him from all sides.
And they took the marvels with them to his court.
Art thou shaved, man?
I am shaved, answered he.
Is thy daughter mine now?
O musha, mother, says Jack, why do you ax me that question?
Where are you going?
More power to you, Jack, says the dog.
Well, well, throw your tail over your arm, and come along.
May your child never know a hungry belly!
May I be so bold as to ask where yez are all going?
Oh, you anointed villain!
At him, good dog!
O musha, naybours!
No sooner said than done.
Bother you, Black Cock!
Easy, boys!
Then Jack made a sign, and they all sung out like mad.
Hee-haw, hee-haw!
Level your pistols!
The robbers were frightened out of their lives.
Thousand murders!
Oh, tattheration to you all, you unfeeling vagabones!
Ah, will any of you pull a bed of dry grass for me?
Ah, if you only knew what I have gone through for you!
Come, be off, you lazy strollers!
And how did you know there were six, you poor innocent?
Begrudge, indeed!
Not one of you will ever see a poor day if I can help it.
Then he came to a house.
The Shee an Gannon took service, and ate his supper.
Poor miserable creature!
The heart in his body grew strong at this thought.
We saw a light before us.
But does that hare come here still?
He does indeed, said the Gruagach.
Who has dared to interfere with my fighting pet?
The cowboy and the Gruagach stood by the fire.
We must clear a road through this, said the cowboy.
What scoundrel struck that blow?
It was I, said the cowboy.
What reason had you to strike the man who won my daughter?
I might as well lie down and die at once.
Just at this moment the lady looked out of the window.
Do you see that black thing at the end of the field?
I do, replied her husband.
Who are you, my good man?
Play with you!
Why what has a poor old man like you to play for?
Much good may it do you, friend, said he.
What better hap could I look for, fool that I am!
Will you play again?
Well, what of them!
Nonsense, man!
Play with him, husband, said his wife.
Will you play again?
Accept his offer, said she.
They played again, and the story-teller lost.
Sure I was won, said she.
You would not cheat the poor man, would you?
Have you any more to stake?
You know very well I have not, replied the story-teller.
Again they played, and again the story-teller lost.
You have your choice now, but you may not have it later.
The hare fled, the dogs followed.
And how did you like the sport?
He could see all but none could see him.
Whence come you, and what is your craft?
Thou canst not do it, said one and all.
Six shalt thou have.
Seest thou my two ears!
The lad ran up the thread and all three soon disappeared.
Five pieces, and again five were paid him, and lo!
What canst thou do?
I can play, said the lank grey beggarman.
When the king heard a harper was outside, he bade him in.
Heardst thou ever the like?
That I have often, said the king.
Is it me myself, you mean?
Back they hurried to the king who had fallen fast asleep.
The captain of the guard was sorely puzzled.
Are you wishful to hang me a third time?
No, said the other.
Not help it!
Not help kicking me into the mouth of my own hounds!
The old man answered and said, Not I.
Will you give me the first son you have?
I would give ye that, were I to have a son, said he.
He had rest neither day nor night.
The son asked his father one day, Is any one troubling you?
The lad said, I must know what it is.
His father came home with the sword.
So they asked him to divide it for them.
He went away with the cattle, and the grazing was but bare.
He returned for the cattle, and he put them into the park.
And at each other went the men.
Next day he betakes himself to the castle.
He went forward, up a little, and there was spoil!
He asked what cause of woe there was that night.
What suitor is that?
I say not that, said he.
He is a champion who stands the war, said the youth.
And to meet the beast he went with his sword and his dog.
One of them would now be under, and now above.
But at last he cut one of the heads off it.
Good luck and victory follow you, lad!
It is I am pleased to see you, said she.
Come up and take breath.
He put it on the knot and gave it to her.
Who else took the head off the beast but you?
Then there was joy and gladness.
About the same time on the morrow, the two went away.
The officer hid himself as he usually did.
They said that the herd had not tried them yet.
They were now married, and everything went on well.
But when the wife saw the sea-maiden she stopped.
The sea-maiden said, Play on!
So the sea-maiden put up his head out of the loch.
But the sea-maiden took the princess, his wife.
Sorrowful was each one that was in the town on this night.
The old soothsayer met him.
The black horse leaped the strait.
He sprang and he put his foot on it.
Deliver to me my wife!
In the wink of an eye she was by his side.
God save all here!
Fin was a proof of this.
Thank goodness, dear!
Glory be to God!
When will he be here?
Fin knew not on what hand to turn him.
Oonagh, said he, can you do nothing for me?
Keep your toe in your pump, will you?
Leave him to me, and do just as I bid you.
God save all here!
Is he at home?
Did you ever see Fin?
How could I?
Blood and fury!
Here are two of my teeth out!
What kind of bread this is you gave me.
Thunder and gibbets!
Are you strong?
The latter squeezed and squeezed the stone, but in vain.
You a giant!
Trembling was kept at home to do the cooking and work.
They carried on in this way for seven years.
How could I go?
And now tell me what dress will you have?
We have great news, said they.
We saw a wonderful grand lady at the church-door.
I would go, said Trembling, if I could get the going.
What robe will you wear?
What colour do you want the mare to be?
That moment she had them.
The saddle on the mare was silver, and so was the bridle.
The henwife had the dinner ready.
What news have you to-day?
Oh, we saw the grand strange lady again!
I would go if I had a new dress to wear.
What dress would you like?
Then the henwife asked what kind of a mare she would ride.
The strange lady came again, in grander array than before.
Why say so when you were at home every Sunday?
Is there any other young woman in the house?
Every man was satisfied, and knew that she was the woman.
Then the son of the king of Lochlin stepped forth.
The struggle began, and a terrible struggle it was.
The wedding lasted for a year and a day.
A great whale came and swallowed her.
The whale will cast me out three times.
Under the breast-fin of the whale is a reddish-brown spot.
Next day he went again to the sea.
The whale came and cast Trembling on shore again.
How did you forget?
The woman of the house gave me a drink that made me forget.
That moment the prince fired.
In time Trembling had a second child, a daughter.
JACK AND HIS MASTER A poor woman had three sons.
I am satisfied, says the master.
I am satisfied, said the master again.
Are you sorry for our agreement?
Oh no, not at all, said he.
Next day Jack was to go clamp turf on the bog.
Nothing at all, but to go to bed.
Oh, very well, sir.
He came up.
Jack, you anointed scoundrel, what do you mean?
To go to sleep, master.
Do you blame me, sir?
Yes, you rascal, I do.
One divel and thirteen imps, you tinker!
Are you sorry for it?
Oh, ya, no, I mean.
What are you doing, you contrary thief?
Do you blame me for what I have done?
Oh, not at all, not at all!
Down came the switch on Jack.
Jack, you vagabone, do you see what the cows are at?
And do you blame, master?
To be sure, you lazy sluggard, I do?
Hand me out one pound thirteen and fourpence, master.
There she is as harmless as a lamb.
Are you sorry for hiring me, master?
To be, that is, not at all.
Never fear, master!
Where will I look for them?
Oh, every place likely and unlikely for them all to be in.
The churl was getting very exact in his words.
What are you doing there, you rascal?
What would bring them there?
Go and search for them as if they were your own.
The heifers were all in the paddock before sunset.
Is this the way you are mending the path, Jack?
Feet off my sheep, you anointed rogue!
And to be sure I am, not yet, any way.
You know yourself bade me.
Sorrow on me that ever I had the bad luck to meet with you.
My time is up.
He was as gentle as a lamb at home but a lion in the chase.
What work can ye do?
I can do all kinds of work, said Ivan.
Give me my wage, said Ivan.
Tell it me, then, said Ivan.
Where have you been so long?
Oh, come with us!
But when they took the new road Ivan kept to the old one.
They began to cry out, Thieves!
Come lodge with us at our cost, and welcome.
Not yet, said the merchants, sup with us, and welcome.
So he got up and looked, and heard the monk speaking.
Who knows, they replied, who committed the crime?
Who committed the crime!
I was just thinking what to do when you came.
What purse is that you are talking about?
How joyful I am!
But all the while he was wondering and wondering.
Andrew Coffey!
Andrew Coffey!
Good heavens!
It was louder this time, and it was nearer.
And then what a thing to ask for!
And the man was in a towering rage.
And then he sat down to rest.
Better see than be seen, thought he.
The rain had stopped and the wind fallen.
Never a word did he say, and he looked as pale as old snow.
If he had kept still before, he kept stiller now.
Andrew Coffey!
Andrew Coffey!
Andrew Coffey!
Andrew Coffey!
Andrew Coffey, Andrew Coffey, tell me a story.
Is it a story you want?
The tale was long, and may be Andrew Coffey was weary.
I am seeking a servant, said the farmer to the wren.
Will you take me?
You, you poor creature, what good would you do?
Try me, said the wren.
A mouse came out and she eats that.
He struck again, and he struck off two grains.
Out came the mouse and she eats them.
You have your tribe with you, said the wren.
Come up now on the root of my two wings.
Now, said the raven, see you that house yonder?
Go now to it.
And if she asks you, Were you at the battle of the birds?
When he loosed the bundle he was astonished.
In a twinkling he sees the very grandest place he ever saw.
And on the same day they married.
Leave the matter between me and the giant, says the queen.
The giant had not gone far when he put the rod in his hand.
The giant returned in a very great rage and anger.
Then the giant understood that he had the right one.
At a glance he saw the finest face he had ever seen.
And as he promised he did.
The giant took him to the byre.
Come over, says Auburn Mary, and lay down your weariness.
He sat down near her.
He was so tired that he fell asleep beside her.
I have cleaned it, says he.
Somebody cleaned it, says the giant.
Well, well!
He was running after them till the sweat was blinding him.
About mid-day who should come but Auburn Mary.
I am, said he.
When he awoke, Auburn Mary was gone.
I thatched it, says he.
Somebody thatched it, says the giant.
The eggs thou wilt find in the nest.
I must have them for my first meal.
Its match was not in the whole wood.
From the foot to the first branch was five hundred feet.
She came who was always bringing help to him.
You are losing the skin of your hands and feet.
I am, says he.
I am no sooner up than down.
Now I am lame for life!
He gave the eggs to the giant.
They were married, and the dancing began, that was a dance!
But to rest they went.
Now, says she, sleep not, or else you are a dead man.
The giant awoke and called, Are you asleep?
Not yet, said the apple that was at the head of the bed.
At the end of a while he called again.
Not yet, said the apple that was at the foot of the bed.
Not yet, said the apple at the kitchen door.
The giant called again.
The apple that was at the big door answered.
You are now going far from me, says the giant.
Not yet, says the apple that was outside the house.
You are flying, says the giant.
There is a twig of sloe tree, said he.
Throw it behind us, said she.
He was not long making a way through the blackthorn.
If you will do that, says the giant, I must take them home.
He returned home and left them at the house.
He was not long in making a road through the rock.
I will leave the tools here, and I will return no more.
Where is the water, wife?
I think, wife, that you have turned crazy.
Up with the drink, said her father.
The silver pigeon sprung, and ate that up.
Which of the keys should I keep?
Then listen if the twins say anything.
The next giant was a beautiful boy with three heads on him.
Well, to be sure!
Thankee, says Tom.
Tom would not bring the flail into the palace.
WALES makes a poor show beside Ireland and Scotland.
CORNWALL and MAN are even worse than Wales.
The Celts are at the furthermost end of Europe.
Kilkenny Archaeol.
Wright, pp.
I fail to see much analogy.
A much closer one is in Campbell, ii.
Other examples are xi., xv., xx., and perhaps xxii.
Parallels are accumulated by the Grimms, ii.
His Darthula is a similar cobbling of our present story.
M. Cosquin, in his notes to No.
No other version is known in the British Isles.
There stands the stone to tell if I lie.
It tells the tale in five acts, all included in one sketch.
Out of her mouth to be sure.
The story is obviously a favourite one among the Celts.
These dates, it will be seen, are of importance.
It was clearly from this note that the Hon.
The legend is now firmly established at Bedd Gellert.
It must have occurred early among them.
Oh, the gods will provide.
The Wang house had suffered greatly.
The roof had fallen in, weighed down by heavy snow.
Bless his good heart!
No mother ever had a better boy.
I hope he is right in saying the gods will provide.
Just then there was a loud knocking at the gate.
When the widow Wang called out, Come in!
Now look at her.
What do you mean?
Have you come here to laugh at our misfortunes?
By no means.
Thanks, good priest, for your kindness.
May I try it now?
As soon as I am gone.
Would those three minutes never pass?
Could the priest have told the truth?
Off came the lid!
She could wait no longer.
Wonder of wonders!
Come, come, lad!
Anything was preferable to this misery.
Whitehead leaped upon a bench, purring like a sawmill.
Ming-li did not have long to wait.
Could he have heard correctly?
Did his ears deceive him?
Eat and ask no questions, counselled the Widow Wang.
When you are satisfied I will tell you everything.
Wise advice!
And she held out to him the golden beetle.
Baubles indeed!
Fie, fie, my boy!
You little know what you are saying.
Now began a long period of perfect happiness.
One day a Mr. and Mrs. Chu came from a distant village.
Yes, and I know where it came from, exclaimed his wife.
A charm, eh?
Why is it that other people have all the luck?
It looks as if we were doomed forever to be poor.
Doubtless they keep very close watch over it.
Luck is surely with us, cried Mrs. Chu, clapping her hands.
They are going this very day to the Temple fair.
Not a soul had seen her enter the Wang house.
It was long before she could grasp the truth.
Oh, if they had only not got used to such dainties!
How hard it was to go back to scraps and scrapings!
Whatever is the matter with you?
Are you mad from hunger, or have you caught another flea?
Do you indeed?
Of course I am.
Here is the plan.
You remember all our big dinners that came from the pot?
Is that true?
I thought it curious, but never dreamed she was a thief.
I was wrong!
What do you suggest?
I am with you through thick and thin.
Alas, that I am not a cat!
If I were like you I could scale the wall.
It is the first time in all my life I ever envied a cat.
We will go together, continued Whitehead.
No sooner arranged than done.
The companions set out that very night on their adventure.
It was midnight when they reached the Chu house.
Pray, good puss, not so fast with your sharp teeth!
Kindly be careful with your claws!
I will promise not to run away.
However, I am quite willing to put you to the test.
Oh, we have been in luck lately, I can tell you.
But this is a poor tumble-down house.
How can they afford such eating?
What do you think of that for honour, Sir Rat?
Oh, oh, oh!
Why, that explains everything!
No, certainly not!
Do you know where she hides it?
Yes, in a crevice where the wall is broken.
Live on the memory of your good deed, purred the cat.
It is splendid, you know, to be an honest beggar.
I will wait here for your return.
Its honour was safe, but it was afraid of Whitehead.
It was too great a temptation.
There was the sound of loud wailing inside.
A sad sight greeted the gaze of Whitehead.
I have rescued it and brought it back to you.
Breakfast, son, breakfast!
Wake up from your swoon!
Fortune has come again.
We are saved from starvation!
Too bad, old fellow, that you are hungry.
Can a carpenter make shoes?
Bells and cannon are cast from similar material.
You ought easily to adapt yourself to this new work.
Just hear the girl, interrupted the ambitious mother.
What do you know about success and failure?
There he received his instructions from the Son of Heaven.
Will it be the largest in the world?
When will it be finished?
Truly, despair and prayer rhyme in every language.
The great day dawned.
A slight bow of the head, a lifting of the finger!
There are gold and silver and the baser metals.
Oh, my China!
Take my life, I beg you, as a punishment for my failure.
Rise, Kwan-yu, said the great Prince.
For many months he laboured night and day.
Now, I bid you mark well my words.
Oh, how can he cross over?
But now all these dreams of happiness must be forgotten.
There was no other maiden to give up her life for Kwan-yu.
There was a look of stern expectancy on his face.
Twice he had excused his underling for failure.
Now there could be no thought of mercy.
And so we may say that Kwan-yu was prepared to die.
It is the only way!
And Kwan-yu, what of Kwan-yu, the frantic father?
Poor little Ko-ai!
What are you doing, Daddy?
Honeysuckle would ask.
What can those queer-looking papers be?
On every piece is written a sin that we have done.
What is a sin, Daddy?
But, Daddy, the kite is so pretty.
Make haste and cut the cord.
Are you never coming to the hero of this tale?
There were many answers to his invitation.
But, alas for poor Honeysuckle!
Not one of all those wise men could cure her!
And oh, I do not want to die!
Just then her face began to turn pale.
It is coming!
The pain is coming, father!
Very soon I shall be no more.
Good-bye, father!
To cure my daughter?
Wonder of wonders!
No sooner had it passed her lips than a miracle occurred.
The dog barked thrice, as if in assent.
Honeysuckle was gone for ever.
A rustling of leaves attracted his attention.
He looked up.
Ah, my daughter!
My darling daughter, where have you been all these years?
Has your life been filled with sorrow?
He can change himself at will into a thousand shapes.
Then he is your husband?
And where do you live?
This goddess was named Lu-o.
But this was not all.
The greatest of these was in the capital city.
Then and there she determined to punish the Emperor.
Are you speaking of Su-nan?
None other, mighty Son of Heaven.
So sure that I will stake my head on your being satisfied.
Add the imperial seal to the message.
The Prime Minister smilingly departed to give the order.
The viceroy, as he knew, was a man of iron.
Nor was the Prime Minister mistaken.
To have his command thus disobeyed was an unheard-of crime.
Right is on our side.
The gods of battle will help those who fight for justice.
Thus for a second time was Su-nan victorious.
I fear you must give up the fight.
Lead, therefore, your daughter to the palace.
Throw yourself upon the mercy of the throne.
With a sigh, the viceroy yielded to their wishes.
Then he made himself visible.
I am but a helpless girl, and here she began to cry.
Dry your tears, he said soothingly.
It will be very easy.
Only let me take your form for a little.
Make your heart easy.
He will never know.
But what will become of the real me?
Shall I have to be a fox and look like you?
No, not unless you want to.
At last there was open talk of a rebellion.
Thus small feet became the fashion among women.
At last the people rose in a body against the ruler.
A great battle was fought.
But no one wished to kill so lovely a creature.
Every one appointed refused to do the deed.
At that moment Ta-ki fell in a swoon upon the floor.
Marvel of marvels!
The gods have shielded her!
Just then Ta-ki opened her eyes and looked about her.
Where am I?
Pray tell me what has happened.
She was herself once more.
A man in his condition has no more sense than a baby.
Li awoke with a start.
He had slept only ten minutes.
Water, water, he moaned, bathe my head with cold water.
I am half dead with pain!
This blazing heat will kill me.
Wang, Wang!
But still no Wang.
What do they care for a man when he is sick?
What does he care if I die of a raging fever?
Doubtless he expects to inherit all my money.
And my servants!
What does he care if I pass away?
Water, water!
How delightful!
I will do it.
I will cast myself head first into the fish-pond.
Was that a servant calling?
Had Wang discovered the absence of his employer?
You would, eh?
The giant fish laughed all the louder.
What time do you suppose I have for Classics?
You make me laugh till I cry!
Why did you laugh?
Speak out at once, fellow!
Just hear the man!
Now, fancy your wishing to stay in the water for ever!
What do you know about water?
What would you do if you really lived here always?
What am I doing now?
Floundering, retorted the other.
Are those big eyes of yours made of glass?
I see you too well.
What would you do to keep yourself from starving?
Look at your clothes, too, water-soaked and heavy.
Nature forgot to give you any scales.
See the point, eh?
Then, are you indeed contented with your lot?
Are there not moments when you would prefer to be a man?
How dare you suggest such a disgraceful change!
Can it be that you do not know my rank?
Mr. Li struggled vainly to keep up.
Whom have you here, my lad?
But, have the goodness first to cease your bowing.
No sooner said than done.
Only his arms remained uncovered.
There are two cautions I would impress upon you.
It was no easy matter, at first, to move them properly.
How to get something to eat?
All for nothing!
No fly or worm of any kind to gladden his eager eyes!
The sight gave new strength to his weary fins and tail.
For an instant Li hesitated.
The worm floated a trifle nearer to his half-open mouth.
How tempting!
After all, what was a hook to a fish when he was dying?
Why be a coward?
He had it in his mouth.
What was that strange feeling that, Ouch!
Nearer and nearer he approached the surface.
The more he struggled the sharper grew the cruel barb.
Ah, a carp!
What good luck!
And then there should be no more barbs for him.
An escaped fish fears the hook.
Come, hurry up about it.
Oh, the horrors of that journey on land!
It was all he could do to breathe.
Joy of joys!
Hey, Sing, he shouted, at the top of his voice, help, help!
This son of a turtle wants to murder me.
Here is the finest fish of the season.
Carp is his favourite delicacy.
He has a bad attack of fever.
Shades of Confucius!
It sounds as if the carp were talking.
What, a talking fish, laughed Chang.
Oh, master!
I hope you will be hungry when you sit down to this fish.
Help to devour myself, eh?
Save me, save me!
My fish voice is not strong enough for his hearing.
Only take me back to the pond and set me free.
Only hear me and obey!
Listen, my dear cook, listen!
You will scrape off my beautiful shiny scales!
You will whack off my lovely new fins!
You will murder your old master!
Thanks be to Buddha, I am not a fish!
Sing has bidden guests for to-morrow.
Could his eyes be deceiving him?
In great excitement he scurried toward the temple.
And yet, not once had he been granted this favour.
He had asked his father to explain the mystery.
Why do they have a turtle?
Why not a lion or an elephant?
He lay there for a few moments, not daring to move.
There, there!
See what you are doing, stirring up such a dust!
Why, you will strangle me if you are not careful.
I meant no harm in coming, said the child finally.
I only wanted to look at you more closely.
Oh, that was it, hey?
Well, that is strange.
All the others come and stare at the tablet on my back.
I hear a voice.
The keeper is coming back.
Then you may hide in the corner there until he has passed.
I have something more to tell you.
Bamboo did as he was told.
They were talking about the great men who had just gone.
The watchmen have forgotten to lock the gate.
What is to prevent my getting my freedom this very night?
You open the gate, I walk out, and no one the wiser.
Why it will make this building famous.
Oh, I shall have a good time out in the big world.
Just here Bamboo began to cry.
Now what is the silly boy blubbering about?
Is he nothing but a cry-baby?
Just like all the others.
It is so lonely here, and I have no playmates.
You are the only friend I have.
The tortoise laughed loudly.
What do you say to going with me then?
But how shall you get the tablet off your back?
The tablet is too tall to go through.
Oh, no, I would not break a promise.
Are you ready?
Yes, quite ready.
So saying, the turtle took a step.
The tablet swayed backward and forward, but did not fall.
Oh, how good it looks outside, he said.
How pleasant the fresh air feels!
Is that the moon rising over yonder?
Bamboo shivered with fear.
Would his father come and find out what had happened?
No one will come at this hour of the night to spy on us.
Where are you going?
And is it far?
Where is the beginning of the world?
I have never studied geography.
Never fear, said his friend.
Only sit quietly, and there will be no danger.
Bamboo grew dizzy as the turtle rose farther into the sky.
Now, directly beneath them was a city.
Beyond that is the Province of the Western Valleys.
In one hour we shall be above Thibet.
On they whizzed at lightning speed.
As it was, his hands and feet were cold and stiff.
How pleasant for Bamboo!
When he waked up it was morning.
He was lying on the ground in a wild, rocky region.
Ho, ho, my lad!
You see we are a little early.
Where are we?
In the land of the beginning, said the other wisely.
We flew over Thibet, and then went northwest for two hours.
It is so long since they saw me.
I hear the dragon coming now, if I am not mistaken.
Yes, here he is.
How glad I am to see him!
Its feathers were of five colours.
Yes, yes, a clever boy indeed, echoed the phoenix.
But, I fear he will never come to this meeting-place.
Just listen!
As if one of us could die!
Why, you talk like a mere mortal.
The three friends laughed heartily.
Come, come, we must hurry, said the turtle.
I am afraid your father will think you are lost.
Back they flew even faster than they had come.
Come out from under that turtle, boy!
What are you doing inside the temple in the dirt?
Bamboo rubbed his eyes.
What killed you, foolish boy?
What can you be talking about?
Really I believe you are getting too lazy to eat.
Her cruel master treated her very badly.
This kind of life was especially hard for Hu-lin.
Two hours later the miser walked out into the yard.
This was precisely what the gander had been expecting.
On the sand near by lay a well-known form.
Has old Black Heart been beating you?
Then he must be a fairy in disguise!
And Hu-lin laughed outright.
I wonder if I dare?
Yes, yes, of course!
He must be in the back-yard digging in his garden.
This is very strange, whispered the gander.
Surely he cannot have gone in to rest.
Led by her friend, Hu-lin entered the house on tiptoe.
Does he have a fire in cold weather?
It is strange, very.
Where did you learn so much?
Good gracious!
What will he say if he finds us here?
Thus the day wore on and darkness fell over the land.
It is more than my goose brain can think out.
What does this mean?
Forgive me, kind sir, but what have you done to my master?
Am I not your master, you mad creature?
You are more stupid than ever this morning.
What, shouted the other, you say I am still young?
The man turned towards the little girl.
Never have I seen a man so beautiful.
At last a smile lighted up his face.
I am Hu-lin, said the child simply, Hu-lin, the slave girl.
He clapped his hands.
Pray do, kind sir, she replied eagerly.
When I was a boy he gave me everything I wished.
My teacher often scolded me for having such notions.
He thought such men were very foolish.
I answered with a sneer.
In every way I had been changed completely into an old man.
He looked at me sadly and shook his head.
I was his only son, and he could not be happy without me.
I saw you yesterday morning, shouted the gander.
Nothing satisfied my greed for money.
Everything must be turned into cash.
In this way I made a start at working out the riddle.
But I am not a mad goose, hissed the gander angrily.
How clever!
To-day by accident it has really come to pass.
So I am the tiger-forest, am I?
Then, too, you told me you were a slave girl.
Oh, I am so glad!
Who can be knocking in that fashion?
At last the old woman was frightened.
My poor son!
Something has happened to him.
She did not need to be told what had happened.
He was my only boy.
Who will take care of me in my old age?
Why have the gods treated me in this cruel way?
The longer she mourned, the more violent she became.
In the city she asked her way to the public hall.
Calming herself, she hobbled into the great hall of trial.
What is the matter, old woman?
Why do you raise such an uproar in front of my yamen?
Speak up quickly and tell me of your trouble.
I have no money and no way of earning money.
I have not one relative now in all the empire.
I depended on my only son for a living.
But yesterday he went and did not return.
My bleeding heart cries out for justice.
But, woman, are you mad?
Did you not say it was a tiger that killed your son?
How can a tiger be brought to justice?
Of a truth, you must have lost your senses.
The hall echoed with the noise of her howling.
The mandarin could stand it no longer.
I will do what you ask.
Only go home and wait until I summon you to court.
The slayer of your son shall be caught and punished.
The old woman, however, was too sharp for him.
Very well, you will do, answered the judge.
Here is your order.
Go forth and do your duty.
So saying, he handed the warrant to Li-neng.
Now, old woman, are you satisfied?
Quite satisfied, your worship, she replied.
Then go home and wait there until I send for you.
Drunken sot!
Li-neng shook his head.
Quite easy.
Call it easy, if you like.
Better go and say good-bye to your father and mother.
They will never see you again.
He had been very foolish.
No such order had ever been written before!
But the judge was in no mood for joking.
And why not?
You agreed to arrest this tiger.
Why is it that to-day you try to get out of your promise?
Li-neng knelt and knocked his head on the floor.
I was drunk, he cried, when I gave my promise.
I knew not what you were asking.
I can catch a man, but not a tiger.
I know nothing of such matters.
I give you five days.
The best hunters in the country were employed.
On the fifth day he had to report his failure.
He received a thorough beating, fifty blows on the back.
But that was not the worst of it.
The poor fellow was in despair.
This he knew very well, and yet he had little hope.
His friends shook their heads when they saw him.
You see he has escaped completely.
Li-neng shook his head on hearing this advice.
I am a dead man!
Would that I had never touched a drop of wine!
Just then he heard a slight rustling near by.
But Li-neng was no longer afraid of tigers.
He knew there was only one way to save himself.
I have been sent out to find you and lead you to trial.
This has been the cause of my beating.
All along the way there was great excitement.
The man-slaying tiger has been caught, shouted the people.
He is being led to trial.
The crowd followed Li-neng into the hall of justice.
The tiger gravely nodded his head.
Yes, he killed my boy!
Give him the death that he deserves!
Did you not know it?
You have robbed a helpless old woman of her only son.
There are no relatives to support her.
She is crying for vengeance.
You must be punished for your crime.
The law must be enforced.
However, I am not a cruel judge.
What say you, will you accept my offer?
Once more the old woman was very angry.
Her neighbours shook their heads as they saw her.
She cannot live long, they said.
She has the look of death on her wrinkled face.
But they were mistaken.
He no longer had the old desire to kill.
At last in the course of nature the good old soul died.
The faithful tiger mourned long for his dear mistress.
She whom he loved was gone for ever.
The fairest and best of these was Kwan-yin, the youngest.
She cared little for the pomp and splendour of court life.
Every day she went to her room to read and study.
She was kind to the poor and suffering.
The old man bade her rise and come closer.
It is necessary that you be given at once in marriage.
Not ready, child!
Why, are you not eighteen?
The king sighed deeply at hearing these words.
He loved his daughter and did not wish to wound her.
Kwan-yin turned pale.
Her sisters had long since given up hope of becoming queen.
They were amazed at her stupidity.
She was dressed as a poor maiden.
She said she wished to become a nun.
The next day the princess went back to the same spot.
Full of fear, Kwan-yin hurried up the hill to the nunnery.
For a few days they treated her much better.
Kwan-yin heard their unkind remarks in silence.
This is a place for work, they told her.
All of us have laboured hard to win our present station.
You must do likewise.
Oh, who has brought this woe upon us?
Who has done this great evil?
The threatening sounds outside grew louder and louder.
I am the cause of all this trouble.
Yes, I, for I am indeed the daughter of a king.
I fled from the palace.
Then, see what you have brought upon us, miserable girl!
See how you have repaid our kindness!
Our buildings will be burned above our heads!
How wretched you have made us!
You have no right to say that, for I am innocent of evil.
On the morrow, she was led before the old king.
From a neighbouring room came the sounds of sweet music.
A feast was being served there amid great splendour.
For this act you deserve to die.
And when, most august King, would you have me decide?
But her strong will kept her from relenting.
Then you refuse to do my bidding!
Take her, men!
Give to her the death that is due to a traitor to the king!
Guilt must suffer here, and sin find no reward.
Depart thou, then, from my dominion.
Judging by their faces, they were father and son.
The younger had a small box on his shoulder.
All the people seemed very happy.
The two men walked about aimlessly.
They seemed to have no friends among the pleasure-seekers.
We can do many tricks for the amusement of the people.
Ask them what they can do, said the mandarin eagerly.
They must show us something new.
Did you not say that you came from the land of dreams?
These tricks you have done are stale and shopworn.
Most certainly, your excellency.
Be assured, sir, anything that you demand I can do for you.
Only say the word.
The mandarin laughed outright at this boasting language.
Take care, my man!
Do not go too far with your promises.
What shall we command them to do?
I have it, cried the host finally.
Our feast was short of fruit, since this is the off season.
Suppose we let this fellow supply us.
Here, fellow, produce us a peach, and be quick about it.
We have no time for fooling.
What, masters, a peach?
Surely at this season you do not expect a peach.
To think of people wanting peaches at this season!
What is the world coming to?
Wonderful, wonderful!
Everything is ready for the journey, said old Chang calmly.
My son here will bring us the magic peach.
The people gazed in open-mouthed wonder.
It is coming, he said quietly.
The peach will soon be here.
Who now will look after my grave when I am gone?
Perhaps he will return, they said.
Have courage!
Yes, but in what a shape?
Next came the head, a leg, the body.
Then a wonderful change came over his face.
He seemed all of a sudden to forget his grief.
Turning to the box, he raised the lid.
They have been very kind to us.
For a moment all were silent.
The fairies have surely come to visit us!
The city will be blessed with good fortune!
Perhaps it is Fairy Old Boy himself who is among us!
They seem not to be ruling for their own reward!
This plague was of the worst kind.
Ying-lo now found himself alone on the sea.
The poor boy did not know what to do or to think.
If so, he would soon escape.
Anything would be better than to be alone upon the sea.
Nearer and nearer came the fireball.
Do you remember me?
With a puzzled look, at first the child shook his head.
Not a crust was thrown into my bowl.
Do you remember now, my child?
Not one is left of my family.
My poor, poor father and mother!
They were brought up in poverty.
But what about you, my boy?
You were not deaf when I asked you.
Have you not been whipped and punished all your life?
How then did you learn to look with love at those in tears?
What are they?
What must I do to save my family?
Ying-lo was silent, and for a moment his face was clouded.
Yes, I know, he said finally, brightening.
They burned incense once at the temple.
That was certainly a deed of virtue.
But when was it, little one, that they did this?
Selfish, selfish!
You are right, he answered.
Can you think of nothing else?
Until he died the next week.
Did they try to restore them to his people?
But try again, dear boy!
Think once more.
For a long time Ying-lo did not reply.
But remember there is one other thing that depends on you.
Very well, Ying-lo.
Now it is time for me to keep my promise to you.
In an instant each, without a word, arose.
To-day you have had a peep into the awful land of Yama.
What power is it that has saved you from his clutches?
No, there is no memory of goodness in your black hearts.
To him alone you owe my help.
For you, however, he wishes to make a sacrifice.
With sorrow I am yielding to his wishes.
He will try to make a change within your household.
No other hand than his can bear the rod which I am leaving.
And now, my child, the time has come for me to leave you.
Around you lie the corpses of sailors and passengers.
They must first return and free their homes of sin.
It is the only thing we have left worth keeping.
If they should come here, what must I do?
Mr. Lin laughed heartily.
It is the only thing we have worth keeping.
The little fellow was scarcely twelve years old.
He had a bright, sunny face and a happy heart.
No bad results followed.
It seemed just like any other piece of wood.
His father had told him to re-set some young cabbages.
He dropped his basket and rushed to the gate.
He watched with wide-open eyes the work of pillage.
One after another the houses were entered and robbed.
Women were screaming and children crying.
Nearer and nearer came the robbers.
Kill the kid!
Put down the basket, boy!
No stealing here.
Yes, kill him!
Where was he going, and what should he do?
Over to the west was his village.
Night came on.
Soon he fell fast asleep.
Some one had called him distinctly by name.
No one was to be seen.
Had he been dreaming?
Quick as a flash he knew what was the matter.
Wonder of wonders!
A soft enough grave, but rather smelly.
They were just about to burn our house and you in it.
There, there, my boy!
I am not scolding you.
He had heard his father tell the story many times.
Now, what do you propose doing about it?
Doing about it, sir?
Surely my father will be looking for me.
And what could he do if he did find you?
A sorry home he will return to.
You would be just one more mouth to feed.
That would save him from starvation.
But what am I to do?
Why not, boy?
Is this an age when old men are good for nothing?
Now, listen, my boy.
As it is, there is nothing else for me to do.
I cast your father off because he was disobedient.
He has lived in a dirty hovel ever since.
You saved me and went to bed hungry.
I know he is very sorry.
This moonlight is not bright enough for my old eyes.
I shall have to wait for morning.
There you might have had every luxury.
Could it be possible that they would soon be living in it?
With a sigh he closed his eyes and once more fell asleep.
What terrible thing would happen now that it was gone!
What could have taken place while he was sleeping?
At first, he did not know what to do.
More than likely they had gone the day before.
If he could only find his father!
Another turn of the road and he would see the village.
He has come back to his own!
I feared you had been stolen away for ever.
A thief came and took it last night while I was sleeping.
Lost the tablet!
Why, no, my son, you are mistaken!
There it is, just before you.
Yes, it is really the lost tablet!
How glad I am it is back in its rightful place once more.
When they arose their hearts were full of a new happiness.
The forest is the place for rest.
For thirty days I have worked over my books, sighed Ki-wu.
For thirty days I have not had a rest.
My master treats me badly.
It seems good, indeed, to get beyond his reach.
Ki-wu, stooping, picked up the nugget.
It was nearly as large as a lemon, and was very pretty.
Repaid me for my study!
Why, that is impossible.
Here is something far better.
Take it, laughing.
Thus they turned their backs on any chance of quarrelling.
It is the coolest spot in the whole grove.
A countryman was stretched at full length on the ground.
Wake up, fellow!
What trick is this you have played on me, masters?
What do you mean, fellow?
Did you not find the fruit we told you about?
We thought we were doing you a favour.
The tears flow down and wet his feet.
He had been in that spot all day without tasting anything.
At last he saw a flock of ducks swimming in the river.
Oh, for a boiled duck!
What have I done to be thus denied?
Friend Lin, many thanks for your kindness.
By this time the flock had come to shore.
I think I will repeat the dose to-morrow.
I could never be so cruel.
So old Wang went to bed happy.
He got up and paced the floor.
At early dawn he stepped outside his shanty.
Lo, and behold!
Only his face and hands were free of the strange growth.
The gods have fooled me!
Am I to be changed into a bird?
May the gods have mercy on me!
They will kill me!
They will kill me!
Hear the man!
No need to buy garments.
I will do anything you say.
Only, I pray you, free me of these feathers!
You will have to do the whole thing yourself.
What you need is to hear a good scolding.
Mr. Wang, however, did not think in this way.
He woke up very happy.
Then he would be free of his feathers and would go to work.
Truly he had led a lazy life.
But this doing more was just where he got into trouble.
Surely going to jail would be as bad as wearing feathers.
I shall fool Fairy Old Boy too.
How could he say it was my fault?
Mr. Lin invited him to come in and sit down.
He was a plain-spoken, honest kind of man, this Lin.
Yes, said Mr. Lin smiling, a fine flock indeed.
But he said nothing of the stolen fowl.
How many have you?
I counted them yesterday morning and there were fifteen.
But did you count them again last night?
Yes, I did, answered Lin slowly.
And there were only fourteen then?
Why do you speak of it?
What, no importance!
How can you say so?
A hawk most likely.
Nothing more natural, I am sure, in a duck yard.
Well, well, that is too bad!
I am sorry the old fellow is having such a hard time.
He is a good worker and deserves better luck.
Too bad that he had to steal it.
But nothing of the kind happened.
What use, what use?
That would be foolish indeed.
Are you ill?
Yes, very ill, wailed Wang.
There is no use trying to dodge the truth or hide a fault.
Yes, I knew it, answered Lin.
I saw you carrying the duck off under your garment.
After I had boiled your duck and eaten it, I went to bed.
Pretty soon I felt an itching all over my body.
The more I pulled them out, the thicker they grew in.
I could hardly keep from screaming.
Here is the money for your duck.
Duck feathers!
But Lin only laughed the louder.
They must be warm, said Lin, laughing.
Winter is soon coming and you are not over fond of work.
But they make me itch so I can scarcely stand it!
Really you must give me time to think of what to say.
He seized Mr. Lin by the legs crying out, Scold me!
Mr. Lin was now out of patience with his visitor.
I wish you would hurry up and roll out of this!
Fairy Old Boy told me that I was lazy.
You agree with the fairy.
Good-bye, and, many thanks for your kindness.
His life had been one long fight against poverty.
He was ignorant and wicked.
The mandarin cares only about boys, said he roughly.
Yes, and it takes as much to feed her as if she were a boy.
Only once did her heart quake, full of fear.
A huge boat dog ran out at her barking furiously.
Lu-san had made no plans.
So her father had not sold her.
Lately, perhaps, he had tried and failed.
Not until now had she noticed how lonely it was.
Not one of them was her friend.
Ah, how tired she was!
How far she had run!
Take this, for it must be you who lost it in the sand.
I found it on the river bank.
Then a strange thing happened.
How wicked we must be since we could not see her goodness.
Lu-san waited no longer, but rose to dress herself.
Her heart was burning with love for everything around her.
To her surprise the ragged clothes were nowhere to be seen.
More and more amazed, she stooped to put on her shoes.
When she reached the deck everything was changed.
A goddess, a goddess!
For a moment Lu-san paused.
Do you not know me, father?
It is Lu-san, your little daughter.
The man looked at her in wonder.
Mother and sons followed his example.
Then all gazed at her as if waiting for her command.
Speak, father, said Lu-san.
What is it, father?
Have no fear.
First, tell me that you forgive me.
Live in peace, my parents.
Brothers, speak no angry words.
Oh, my dear ones, let joy be yours for ever.
Thus did Lu-san change her loved ones.
What kind of bird is that yonder in the sky?
Every one was excited except Lu-san.
But we will talk of such sad things no more.
Now, why have I called this book The Heroes?
So the Gods have ordained, and it will surely come to pass.
You shall hear while the chest floats on.
Who are you, and whence?
And when he saw fair Danae, he wanted to marry her.
On her head was a helmet, and in her hand a spear.
Perseus, you must do an errand for me.
Who are you, lady?
And how do you know my name?
Where can I find the monster?
Villain and tyrant!
You shall die!
Good Dictys, too, who had come in, entreated him.
Remember that he is my brother.
Where is your present, then?
Hear the boaster!
What is it to be?
You have promised to bring me the Gorgons head?
Then never appear again in this island without it.
You have braved Polydectes, and done manfully.
Dare you brave Medusa the Gorgon?
Show me, then, how I can do this!
And I will bring it!
Will she not freeze me too into stone?
Then Perseus said, I will go, though I die in going.
But how shall I cross the seas without a ship?
And who will show me my way?
Arise, and gird them on, and go forth.
So Perseus arose, and girded on the sandals and the sword.
But Perseus lingered.
May I not bid farewell to my mother and to Dictys?
I will comfort her and Dictys until you return in peace.
Leap, and trust in the armour of the Immortals.
You therefore should know many things.
Tell me, if you can, the path to the Gorgon.
Then one cried, Who is this who reproaches us with old age?
So come, come, come!
Then cried Perseus, Where is that hat, that I may find it?
But the giant smiled.
And he saw the three Gorgons sleeping as huge as elephants.
Were not these sandals to lead me in the right road?
Surely she is a kings daughter.
Do barbarians treat their kings daughters thus?
What cruel men have bound you?
But first I will set you free.
They will slay you, if you dare to set me free.
But she only called the more on her mother.
Why call on your mother?
She can be no mother to have left you here.
She sent me to gain a prize worth all my toil and more.
I carry the weapons of Immortals.
Let them measure their strength against mine!
But Perseus laughed, and said, A sea-monster?
Is there not death and sorrow enough in the world already?
I must die now.
How shall I endure it?
And she tried to thrust him away.
Promise me, and seal it with a kiss.
Was not Andromeda betrothed to my son?
And now she is safe again, has he not a right to claim her?
As yet he seems but a helpless bride-groom.
He left this one to die, and dead she is to him.
Ungrateful man!
Go, or it will be worse for you.
Behold the Gorgons head!
There has never been such a hurler in this land.
Then Perseus put out all his strength, and hurled.
Whither they sailed, my children, I cannot clearly tell.
I do not know, nor care.
And they asked, How shall we set your spirit free?
I would take it and keep it.
A strong man has taken it and kept it long.
Are you stronger than Pelias the terrible?
Will you go to Iolcos by the sea?
Then promise me two things before you go.
For Heras sake, carry me over the torrent.
Do you make game of poor old souls like me?
As thou hast done to me, so will I do to thee.
Good news, good father, both for you and me.
For that very end I came into the town.
Pelias came out wondering, and Who are you, bold youth?
But come in, come in, and feast.
Yet why did he drive my father out?
Yet why did you drive my father out?
Pelias smiled, and sighed.
Men have slandered me in that, as in all things.
You mean me?
I have not harmed you, or him.
I love glory, and I dare keep to my word.
I will go and fetch this golden fleece.
But the women sighed over them, and whispered, Alas!
And a dream came to Aietes, and filled his heart with fear.
Then Jason laughed bitterly.
Fulfil your promise to us, child of the blazing Sun.
Who is this who is proof against all magic?
He may kill the serpent yet.
Then he turned and looked at Medeia.
This is your doing, false witch-maid!
You need not die, said Jason.
Flee home with us across the sea.
Why else are you the priestess of the grove?
The lot is cast, and I must endure it.
I will show you how to win the golden fleece.
Then all the heroes cried together, I will go!
At that some of the heroes cried, Medeia is the murderess.
Let the witch-woman bear her sin, and die!
Where is your aged father, and the brother whom you killed?
Let us stay here and rest awhile.
And another, I care not for the words, but for the music.
They shall sing me to sleep, that I may rest.
And who will help us now?
But Jason said, They can be no savage people.
We will go in and take our chance.
We keep our business to ourselves.
It is too late to turn, said Jason.
Have I not had enough of punishment and shame?
Who are you, strange maiden?
And who is this maiden?
Let us see whose feet are nimblest.
We hold ours to be the best on earth.
And she said, The Gods will punish her, not we.
And Alcinous smiled.
If you dare land here, you die.
Then the heroes cried, We are no pirates.
At last she spoke, I know this giant.
I heard of him in the East.
Then all the heroes cried, What shall we do, wise Medeia?
We must have water, or we die of thirst.
I can face red-hot brass, if the tale I hear be true.
My son Jason is dead long ago at sea.
Promise me never to leave me till I die.
But Jason could not love her, after all her cruel deeds.
And what became of Cheiron, the good immortal beast?
Why should I live for ever in this agony?
Who will take my immortality, that I may die?
He tried to lift it, but he could not.
Let it be for another year.
Do you see that land beyond?
But Theseus wept, Shall I leave you, O my mother?
But she answered, Weep not for me.
What if he will not receive me?
And what have I done that he should receive me?
Where can I go, to do as Heracles has done?
But the shepherds said, Will you go alone toward Athens?
None travel that way now, except in armed troops.
As for arms, I have enough, as you see.
Why should I not go alone toward Athens?
I must wrestle a fall with him to-day.
Then he leapt on him, and called, Yield, or I kill thee!
But I see that you are weary.
Come up to my castle, and rest yourself awhile.
But who are these?
Ah, poor souls!
Well for them that I looked back and saw them!
Happy am I, to whom Heaven sends so many guests at once!
Then Theseus lifted the burden on his back.
The cliffs are steep, and who can climb them?
Is this true, my host, or is it false?
But Procrustes answered never a word.
I come hither to ask for hospitality.
Then take it, and welcome.
So they all sat still where they were.
What is Troezene to you?
But he said hastily, Do you not know who this Theseus is?
I must go out and welcome him.
All I ask, said Theseus, is to eat and drink at your table.
How noble are his looks, and how huge his size!
Ah, would that he were our masters son!
Then a great lamentation arose throughout the city.
I am a stranger here.
Tell me, then, why you come.
Where are the fifty sons of Pallas?
But how will you slay him, my son?
I myself will be one of the seven.
And Theseus said, I know.
Let us go down to the black-sailed ship.
Let me be thrown first to the beast.
Who art thou, then, brave youth?
It is a pity that one so brave should die.
And will you kill the Minotaur?
Then Theseus laughed, and said, Am I not safe enough now?
And he whispered It is done!
But why did they find his bones in Scuros?
So it is still, my children, and so it will be to the end.
It is probable that many more exist.
A word or two as to our title seems necessary.
But I can, says she.
Well, so they were married.
There was nothing in it but a spinning-wheel and a stool.
And away he went about his business.
She sat down on a stool in the kitchen, and law!
All right, says she, I agree.
All right, that says, and law!
And then he went out and locked the door.
Here it be, says she.
And she gave it to him.
Well, come the evening a knocking came again to the window.
Here it be, says he, and he gave it to her.
What, is that Bill?
Is that Ned?
Well, is that Mark?
But she never hit on the right one.
At last it came to the last day but one.
Is that Nicodemus?
Is that Sammle?
A-well, is that Methusalem?
And away it flew.
Well, she felt that horrid.
However, she heard the king coming along the passage.
What is it?
And I heard a kind of a sort of a humming.
She oped the window, and that come right in on the ledge.
That was grinning from ear to ear, and Oo!
Is that Solomon?
Well, is that Zebedee?
Why, whatever is the matter?
Oh, mother!
Dear, dear!
Whatever is the matter?
Why, says the mother, look at that horrid mallet.
Dear, dear, dear!
And he ran straight and turned the tap.
And then they all started a-crying worse than before.
So the gentleman asked the woman what she was doing.
Why, lookye, she said, look at all that beautiful grass.
Oh, you poor silly!
Well, that was one big silly.
How do you manage yours?
So that was another big silly.
Why, they say, matter enough!
Her hair was like golden silk, and it hung to the ground.
There was a stile to cross.
She put down the candles whilst she got over the stile.
Up came a dog and ran off with the candles.
Up came the dog and ran off with the candles.
So she fetched it.
So she fetched it.
So the mother wiped the axe and laughed.
The husband tasted them and shook his head.
He said they tasted very strangely.
She gave some to the little boy, but he would not eat.
One day the rose-tree flowered.
Sing again that beautiful song, asked the shoemaker.
Oh, the beautiful song!
The jeweller gave the watch and chain.
Sing it, sweet bird, again.
If you will put the millstone round my neck, said the bird.
It sang the song and then flew home.
What, said she, shall I do with this little sixpence?
I will go to market, and buy a little pig.
She went a little further, and she met a dog.
She went a little further, and she met a stick.
She went a little further, and she met a fire.
She went a little further, and she met some water.
She went a little further, and she met an ox.
She went a little further, and she met a butcher.
She went a little further, and she met a rope.
She went a little further, and she met a rat.
She went a little further, and she met a cat.
So away went the old woman to the cow.
Where are you going, Jack?
I am going to seek my fortune.
May I go with you?
Yes, said Jack, the more the merrier.
So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.
They went a little further and they met a dog.
Where are you going, Jack?
I am going to seek my fortune.
May I go with you?
Yes, said Jack, the more the merrier.
So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.
They went a little further and they met a goat.
Where are you going, Jack?
I am going to seek my fortune.
May I go with you?
Yes, said Jack, the more the merrier.
So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.
They went a little further and they met a bull.
Where are you going, Jack?
I am going to seek my fortune.
May I go with you?
Yes, said Jack, the more the merrier.
So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.
They went a little further and they met a rooster.
Where are you going, Jack?
I am going to seek my fortune.
May I go with you?
Yes, said Jack, the more the merrier.
So on they went, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt.
And there were some robbers counting over their money.
And then they went in and took possession of the house.
That was the cat, you know.
That was the dog, you know.
That was the goat, you know.
That was the bull, you know.
Of course that was the cock-a-doodle-do.
MR. VINEGAR Mr. and Mrs. Vinegar lived in a vinegar bottle.
In an agony of grief she rushed forth to meet her husband.
What did he see but a number of golden guineas.
Come down, I say.
It was an excellent milker, and perfect in every way.
So he went up to the man.
So the beautiful red cow was given for the bagpipes.
Oh, said Mr. Vinegar, that I had but that stick!
I should then be the happiest man alive.
The poor king was in a terrible case.
So he goes out of the story.
And she went up into a tree to watch for him.
But they sent for the hen-wife and put her to death.
And they lived happy all their days.
Who is there?
Jack Hannaford.
Where do you come from?
Yes, I have.
And how was he a-doing?
Yes, he did, replied Jack Hannaford.
He shall have them, bless his poor soul!
Presently the farmer came home and asked for his money.
What are you about there?
Lord save you!
What was that?
Can you see him still?
Yes, I can.
Get off your horse and lie down.
If you will hold the horse.
Jack did so readily.
I cannot see him, said the farmer.
The farmer walked home without his horse.
So they went there hand in hand.
O sister, sister, reach me your hand!
O sister, O sister, then reach me your glove!
Fair and beautiful she looked as she lay there.
But she was drowned, drowned!
And the harp snapped and broke, and never sang more.
So he says to the first, How much do you love me, my dear?
Why, says she, as I love my life.
Why, says she, better nor all the world.
Why, I love you as fresh meat loves salt, says she.
Well, he was that angry.
And then she went on and on till she came to a great house.
Do you want a maid?
And no one there was so finely dressed as her.
What was that?
The young master, he never took his eyes off her.
Well I should have rarely liked to have seen her, says she.
What are you a-doing of?, says she.
Send for the cook, says he.
So up she comes.
Who made this gruel here?
I did, says the cook, for she was frightened.
Did you make my gruel?
Yes, I did, says she.
Where did you get this ring?
From him that gave it me, says she.
Who are you, then?
But she never told anybody who she was.
Very well, says the cook.
Well, the wedding-day came, and they were married.
What is the matter?
And I asked her how much she loved me.
And now I see she loved me best of all.
And she may be dead for aught I know.
No, father, here she is!
And she goes up to him and puts her arms round him.
And so they were happy ever after.
What shall we do, what shall we do?
Well, Jack, and where are you off to?
What back, Jack?
How much did you get for her?
And now off with you to bed.
At last he dropped off to sleep.
When he woke up, the room looked so funny.
And what do you think he saw?
So the man spoke truth after all.
Good morning, mum, says Jack, quite polite-like.
Could you be so kind as to give me some breakfast.
I may as well be broiled, as die of hunger.
Goodness gracious me!
Here, come quick and jump in here.
He was a big one, to be sure.
They are really magical, you see.
All happened as it did before.
Do you, my dearie?
And they both rushed to the oven.
So she brought it and put it on the table before him.
Down climbs Jack, and after him climbed the ogre.
Which the man did, and the pig built his house.
No, no, by the hair of my chiny chin chin.
No, no, by the hair of my chiny chin chin.
Very well, said the little pig, I will be ready.
What time do you mean to go?
Are they nice apples?
Yes, very, said the little pig.
I will throw you down one.
At three, said the wolf.
Then he could not tell what to do.
He looked round, and, see!
The boy rushed to it, and unclosed the volume.
Set me a task!
The boy only trembled, and his hair stood up.
Set me a task, or I shall strangle thee!
But the lad could not speak.
The fingers burned his flesh.
Set me a task!
Enough, enough!
It rose to his armpits, and he scrambled to the table-top.
Then, said the door, Broom, why do you sweep?
Then, said the window, Door, why do you jar?
Dear, dear!
Maybe I shall be hungry on the road.
Jack said, the silly fellow, that he could do anything.
Come and have some breakfast.
But, oh dear!
Yes, said he.
I should like to see him.
And then the King and Jack shook hands together.
Jump up, then.
Well, well, come in.
Well, said the King, where is the great bird?
The King asked the great bird, Did he see the great castle?
He came running out with it, laughing his best.
Have you got it?
Well, what are you doing there, then?
And poor thing!
But that did not stop long.
Somebody has been at my porridge!
Somebody has been at my porridge!
Somebody has been at my porridge, and has eaten it all up!
Somebody has been sitting in my chair!
Somebody has been sitting in my chair!
Somebody has been lying in my bed!
Somebody has been lying in my bed!
Somebody has been lying in my bed,, and here she is!
But the Three Bears never saw anything more of her.
You shall pay dearly for this.
Oh, Giant, quoth Jack, where are you now?
Will no other diet serve you but poor Jack?
How have you rested?
Nay, we are scarce enough to fill one of his hollow teeth!
Prithee, quoth the giant, what heavy news can come to me?
Oh, cousin Jack, said the giant, this is heavy news indeed!
Jack thanked his uncle, and then went off with them.
With that she put it in her bosom.
It will not be long before I take you fast by the beard.
And many are the times they have dined upon murdered men!
I smell the blood of an Englishman!
Goodness gracious me!
Where are you going, Henny-penny?
May I come with you?
Certainly, says Henny-penny.
Where are you going to, Henny-penny and Cocky-locky?
May I come with you?
Certainly, said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky.
May I come with you, said Goosey-poosey.
Certainly, said Henny-penny, Cocky-locky and Ducky-daddles.
May I come with you?
Henny-penny, Cocky-locky, Ducky-daddles and Goosey-poosey?
Why of course, certainly, without doubt, why not?
So he set out to find Burd Ellen.
One thing to do, and one thing not to do.
And let me come in.
And let me come in.
They travelled and travelled and could see never a house.
It began to be dark, and they were hungry.
They begged hard.
Who have you there wife?
It was dark.
Molly said she would try.
And Molly said she would try.
Molly said she would try.
But Molly never said a word but, Oh, if ye saw what I see!
Never more, carle, quoth she, will I come again to Spain.
So the young man went to seek his fortune.
But the young man knew not.
But the young man knew it not.
But the young man had to give it up.
When the Ettin found this, he knew that his power was gone.
At last she died.
What hast thou done with thy red rosy lips?
All withered and wasted away.
What hast thou done with thy golden hair?
All withered and wasted away.
Where are you, Tommy, my dear Tommy?
She then put Tom in her bosom and ran home with him.
But he soon returned to Court.
He also gave him a coach, drawn by six small mice.
Wipe, wipe your eyes, and shake your head And cry,, Alas!
Tom Thumb is dead!
MR. FOX Lady Mary was young, and Lady Mary was fair.
She had two brothers, and more lovers than she could count.
How pale you are this morning, my dear.
I had horrible dreams.
But it is not so, nor it was not so, said Mr. Fox.
It is not so, nor it was not so, said Mr. Fox.
It is not so, nor it was not so, said Mr. Fox.
It is not so, nor it was not so.
And God forbid it should be so, said Mr. Fox.
It is not so, nor it was not so.
And God forbid it should be so, said Mr. Fox.
It is not so, nor it was not so.
So they called him Lazy Jack.
Ye can, can ye?
Where ye going, Johnny-cake?
Ye can, can ye?
On went Johnny-cake, and by-and-by he came to a bear.
Ye can, can ye?
On went Johnny-cake, and by-and-by he came to a wolf.
Ye can, can ye?
You can, can you?
Then she took it home to her own room.
I was that cooing dove that you coaxed from off the tree.
But who are you then?
Unless you love me, I shall never be happy more.
What can I do, my son?
The weddineers wondered at the sight when, swoop!
What could the weddineers do?
Here, I say, Sally!
Mind him, will ye, while I go for them.
All right, my love, says Mrs. Miacca, and off he goes.
No pudding?
Ah, I loves pudding, says Mrs. Miacca.
Shall I run and get some?
For it was a leg of the sofa that he had put out.
But the man only cursed at him and went on.
Lord Mayor of London!
We must now follow Miss Puss to the coast of Africa.
But the merchant ordered him to come in.
Poor Dick hardly knew how to behave himself for joy.
They had several children.
How did you get such broad broad feet?
How did you get such small small legs?
How did you get such thick thick knees?
How did you get such thin thin thighs?
How did you get such big big hips?
How did you get such a wee wee waist?
How did you get such broad broad shoulders?
How did you get such small small arms?
How did you get such huge huge hands?
How did you get such a small small neck?
How did you get such a huge huge head?
What do you come for?
And three-and-thirty of his men took the oath with him.
Pray, puss, give me my tail.
Come here girl, and tell me on what day you were born?
And the girl took the letter and said she would go.
Yours affectionately, Albert.
So they opened this and read it, and thought it a shame.
Yours affectionately, Albert.
And then he gave it to the girl, bidding her begone.
But she begged hard for her life.
I will never see you or your son again till you desire it.
She was right glad to see it, you may be sure.
Then the magpie put another layer of mud over the twigs.
The very thing!
The lassie did so, but nothing happened.
So Anne lifted the lid but nothing happened.
So Anne went home and told the queen.
So the queen was now quite satisfied, and went back home.
Till midnight all goes well.
They rode on and on till they came to a green hill.
Immediately the green hill opened and they passed in.
The second night passed as the first had done.
All went on as on the first two nights.
Soon there arose a very savoury smell.
Where was I?
I promise you he ran.
Ham and eggs for me!
I can do better than that., Come, my table, be covered!
The publican opened his eyes, but he said nothing, not he.
Now, father, may I marry my lass?
Not unless you can keep her, replied the father.
Father, I have a table which does all my bidding.
Let me see it, said the old man.
Thou hast no silver nor gold, stand off from the rest.
Up stick and bang them!
After a while it began to open its eyes.
The cottage became elegantly furnished.
And what do you think he was doing?
The ointment!
The ointment!
Whatever can that be?
Girls must keep their promises, said the stepmother.
Go and open the door this instant.
For she was glad the girl would have to obey a nasty frog.
Girls must keep their promises!
Master or mister, or whatever you please sir, says she.
And what would you call this?
Bed or couch, or whatever you please, sir.
And what do you call these?
Breeches or trousers, or whatever you please, sir.
And what would you call her?
Cat or kit, or whatever you please, sir.
And this now, showing the fire, what would you call this?
Fire or flame, or whatever you please, sir.
Water or wet, or whatever you please, sir.
And what do you call all this?
House or cottage, or whatever you please, sir.
Aged father, says she, I am going to seek my fortune.
What have you got in your bag and bottle?
Would you like to have some?
Yes, said he, with all my heart.
Promising she would, she took her leave of him.
Then, said he, what have you in your bag and bottle?
No, not a bit, nor a drop, unless it would choke you.
Yes, friend, replied she, with all my heart!
I have been more full.
I have reduced the Suffolk dialect.
S. Baring-Gould.
I heard this in Australia.
I have eliminated a malodorous and un-English skunk.
On surprising robbers, see preceding tale.
Communicated by the Rev.
S. Baring-Gould.
A tale is the better for length, a ballad for its curtness.
S. Baring-Gould.
One never knows what may happen.
The latter reference is to the cry of the King of Elfland.
First, as to the form of the narrative.
Walter Gregor.
I have modified the dialect and changed Mally into Molly.
The change of night-dresses occurs in Greek myths.
It has some resemblance to Childe Rowland, which see.
S. Baring-Gould, in Devonshire.
For similar surprise packets see Cosquin, ii.
I have omitted much of the second part.
M. Gaston Paris has a monograph on Tom Thumb.
The prosaic-minded may substitute Up-late-and-little-food.
Childe Wynd therefore = Childe Owein.
S. Baring-Gould.
The jealous stepmother is universally human.
S. Baring-Gould.
I also added it to No.
The second wish has been somewhat euphemised.
O Tree of mine!
Have you seen my naughty little maid?
What is that you are singing, my good woman?
Hur can do that hurself!
Cousin Jack!
Kind cousin Jack!
These be the six champions of Christendom.
But he would not.
Six of these, said she, belong to the six Champions.
But he would not.
But he would not.
I will slay the monster.
Hearing this St. George laughed loud and long.
Farewell, my magic power, my spell, my all.
The Knight whom thou seest here!
He also attempted to draw my sword but failed.
I remain no longer in this detested place.
Ere Almidor returns from hunting we shall have escaped.
And this was done.
Then seeing nobody in the house she lifted the latch.
And the pillow was in its place upon the bolster!
And upon the pillow, , ?
But the Three Bears never saw anything more of her.
They are sure to have come again by now.
But I can, says the mother, getting angry.
Go you at once, child, and bring me the best on them.
My teeth must just tackle it.
Five skeins!
So the mother agreed.
She thought what a grand marriage it was for her daughter.
And as for the five skeins?
Time enough to bother about them when the year came round.
Anyhow, her daughter would be Queen for eleven months.
And her husband the King was kind as kind could be.
At first she thought it was a mouse.
Then she thought it must be something knocking.
So she upped and opened the door and what did she see?
What are you crying for?
Look at my toes.
Three guesses every night for a whole month!
There you are, my dear, says he as polite as polite.
And remember!
Good-morning, my beauty, says That.
Then That is Ned, says she.
Well, says she a bit more thoughtful, That is Mark.
I shall not have to order your head off, my dear, says he.
And I hope all the other days will pass as happily.
Then he said good-night and locked the door and left her.
But she never hit upon the right one.
Is That Samuel?
Well, is That Methuselah?
Five skeins again!
At something I saw to-day, my love, says the King.
And what do you think I saw?
And oh, my goodness!
Well, is That, Zebedee?
And she lived happy ever after with her husband, the King.
So Jack pocketed the golden snuff-box and went on his way.
And he did sleep!
What do you want, Master?
And so did Jack!
But her father was cautious.
So we must try him again.
If not you will have to forfeit your life.
On hearing this the servant pricked up his ears.
Could you do that?
Why, we can do anything.
He may be able to tell you.
Leave your horse here and take one of mine.
It knows the way and will carry you safe.
So he put his hand in his pocket and pulled out the crumbs.
Here you are, mousekin, he said.
Not I, says Jack.
I should get into trouble with your King.
But the mousekin insisted.
I may be of some use to you, it said.
So the King said to Jack, There remains but one thing.
Leave the horse you are riding here, and take one of mine.
It knows the way, and will carry you safe.
Let us pass.
Summon him at once.
Then the King said, Sirrah!
Have you got it?
Have you got it?
Then what do you want?
My breath, says froggie, and with that he sinks down again.
But alas and alack-a-day!
At last he decided to do half and half.
What did he mean by it?
Why should he take four bites at one cherry?
For the last time, they shrieked.
And with that they flew out of the window.
So they lived happily ever after.
Let her be, it is all she is fit for.
You seem merry folk, he said, and will be good company.
Will you marry me?
But Tattercoats laughed.
And, lo and behold!
Tell me what I am to do.
If you do I will never return.
Here they need a laundry-maid, said the bird-husband.
But I cannot do it for seven days, answered the girl.
I cannot wash or iron.
That matters nothing, replied the bird.
At this the stout butler laughed.
I have seventy pounds laid by with master.
Happen it would, she replied.
I will go and shut them.
And so it happened.
Mr. Butler shut the shutters, but, bru-u-u!
So there he was the whole livelong night.
Stop a bit till I fetch them in.
And sure enough it did.
Now when he saw this he was greatly troubled.
A likely tale, said the master, and beat James soundly.
Something has come over my men.
She is a wicked girl, he said.
Then the coachman grew bold.
That was nothing to what she served me.
And one, he said, hit me on the nose.
But they are well punished, so there is no need to do more.
Then the master went to his wife and said, You are right.
That laundry-maid of yours is a very wise girl.
So they called him Lazy Jack.
But none could suggest a plan.
Every whit of it?
To the last farthing, quoth they.
But Jack shook with laughter.
Will you have me broiled or baked?
And will no diet serve you but poor little Jack?
For he had thought out a plan.
In one corner of the room he had seen two strong cords.
These keys should bring you all else you require.
So saying he proceeded on his journey to Wales.
My club shall dash your brains outright.
But I will be even with you.
Giant think he was asleep.
Then,  WHACK!
Odds splutter hur nails!
Did she sleep well?
Was there not nothing felt in the night?
See, says crafty Jack when he had finished.
Odds splutter hur nails!
Hur can do that hurself!
Thus was Jack quit of the Welsh giant.
That is a cruel law, said the young Prince.
The dead man owed me twopence these seven years.
Pay me as well as the others.
And what good will that be to us?
He will for sure chop us up in a mouthful.
Nay, said Jack, laughing.
Let me go and prepare the way for you.
By all accounts this giant is a dolt.
Mayhap I may manage better than that.
Cousin Jack!
And what news with my poor cousin Jack?
Dear coz, heavy news, God wot!
Heavy news, echoed the giant, half afraid.
God wot, no heavy news can come to me.
Have I not three heads?
Can I not fight five hundred men in armour?
Can I not make them fly like chaff before the wind?
At this the giant began to shiver and to shake.
Cousin Jack!
Kind cousin Jack!
This is heavy news indeed, quoth he.
Tell me, what am I to do?
Cousin Jack!
Kind cousin Jack!
So you will be safe.
When the giant heard this he sighed and shook his head.
So she and the Prince were married the very next morning.
He was a most terrific giant.
It will not be long before I have you fast by your beard.
My goodness!
How the giant roared!
Here it was that the giants used to dine.
Art come, young man, to join us in this dreadful prison?
Through no fault, they cried at once.
Then they choose the fattest and sup off them.
And this moat was spanned by a drawbridge.
I smell the blood of an Englishman.
Then art thou a monstrous miller for sure!
You are the great conqueror of evil monsters.
Now close by there lives one well worthy of your prowess.
And she cried and cried and cried.
Lawks a mercy me!
Dear heart!
So they both sat a-crying.
Dreadful indeed!
But the poor thing was afraid and durst not go.
You never saw such a sight!
A likely story that, says the old woman.
A cow can cut grass for herself.
So mind your own business, young sir.
So now for two more!
What are you doing?
How do you manage yours?
What is the matter?
Has any one fallen in?
Matter enough, says they.
She is no sillier than the rest.
They had never seen such a handsome young man before.
And he had a golden ball in each hand.
Then the hangman said, Hast thee done thy prayers?
Now, lass, put thy head into the noose.
Thou must be hung at once.
Little girl!
Take us out!
Please take us out!
Do take us out or we shall soon be burnt!
Little girl!
Please milk me!
Little girl!
Please shake my branches.
O Tree of mine!
And, lo and behold!
Then the apple tree said, Of course I will.
O Tree of mine!
Certainly I will, answered the cow.
Cow of mine!
So she asked the baker, and he said, Of course I will.
Man of mine!
Then the baker replied, Look in the oven.
She may be there.
No, thank you!
Little girl!
Tree of mine!
For she had always taken a pride in her work.
Laidly Worm!
Go make their topmast heel, Go!
Worm the sand, and creep beneath the keel.
Now the Laidly Worm had no choice but to obey.
So he stayed his hand.
And he kissed the loathly thing twice.
Woe to thee, thou wicked Witch!
An ill fate shalt thine be!
So they both went a-gleaning.
So they both gleaned an ear of corn.
Titty Mouse made a pudding, and Tatty Mouse made a pudding.
So they both made a pudding.
And Tatty Mouse put her pudding into the pot to boil.
Then the three-legged stool said, Tatty, why do you weep?
Then said the door, Broom, why do you sweep?
Then the window said, Door, why do you jar?
So the old form galloped round the house.
So the walnut tree shed all its beautiful green leaves.
So she dropt the pitcher and spilt the milk.
For it was summer-time.
What shall we do?
You are quite a good lad but your wits go a-wool-gathering.
No, we must sell Milky-White and live on the money.
It is no use crying over milk that is not here to spill!
Just so, he cried.
We will sell Milky-White and be richer than ever.
But,  began his mother.
Trust me to make a good bargain.
Ten pounds, indeed!
Jack had made up his mind to twenty!
Twenty solid golden sovereigns!
And where may you be going?
So you will!
So you will!
You look the sort of chap for it.
I bet you know how many beans make five?
He really was sharp as a needle.
Just so, just so!
Well, here they are, so give us Milky-White.
My Milky-White for five common beans!
Not if I know it!
Will that please you?
Two in each hand and one in my mouth, repeated Jack.
Tell me quick how much you got for her.
And I worriting all day lest they should take you in.
What was it?
Jack held out the beans triumphantly.
There, he said.
Them beans!
Then he stared at the little window.
It was covered as if with a curtain by leaves.
For what the queer little old man had said was true!
Up to the very sky?
Jack meant to see at any rate.
So he climbed, and he climbed, and he climbed.
It was the ogre coming home!
Into the oven with you, sharp!
He was a big one for sure.
Better boil them.
Laws-a-mercy me!
Wherever have you been?
So he knew, then, it was all real magic.
After that they must starve.
That night Jack went supperless to bed of his own accord.
And this time Jack was as bold as brass.
Go away, bad boy!
I believe you are the same boy.
You shall tell me when he has gone to sleep.
Better luck to-day, wife!
Roast these trifles for my breakfast!
I want to see gold.
Then the ogre said to the hen, Lay!
None so dusty, henny-penny, laughed the ogre.
Then he said, Lay!
How Jack got down the beanstalk he never knew.
But the very moment Jack touched ground he called out, Lay!
For, whenever they wanted anything, they just said, Lay!
Then he slept like a top.
And, lo and behold!
And by and by he heard,  Thump!
Well, I declare, so do I!
But when she opened the door, lo and behold!
Only some joints of meat roasting and sizzling away.
Then she laughed and said, You and me be fools for sure.
Yes, we be fools to take dead meat for live flesh!
I want to be amused.
So she brought out a little harp and put it on the table.
And, lo and behold!
If you want to know what it sang about?
It sang about everything!
My goodness, it was a race!
Bring an axe!
Bring an axe!
Have a care!
And, lo and behold!
It sang about everything under the sun.
It is still in the garden.
I wonder if it will ever grow?
And what will that child find?
And the eldest said, I will have no one lower than an Earl.
And the second said, I will have none lower than a Lord.
Farewell, mother, you will not see me again.
So she did as she was bid, and, lo and behold!
And she slept soft and warm on his broad back.
But she, remembering all he had done for her, said, Not so!
He will stay with me!
And, lo and behold!
But, he said, the danger is not all over.
And here he bade her dismount and sit on a great rock.
Then at last everything turned blue.
So she waited, and waited, and waited.
Then she heard the horns of hunters and cries of Room!
Room for the Duke of Norroway and his bride!
But the cook was very cruel to her, and led her a sad life.
But Catskin only shook her ears and said nothing.
So Catskin said to the cook, Oh, how I should like to go!
When that came, he again asked her where she lived.
Little pig!
Then he ate up little piggy and went on his way.
Little pig!
Then he ate up little piggy and went on his way.
Little pig!
He puffed and he huffed.
So he thought a bit.
I know where there is ever such a nice field of turnips.
Do you, says little piggy, and where may that be?
Thank you kindly, says the little piggy.
Little pig!
Indeed, says little piggy, and what may that be?
Thank you kindly, says little piggy.
Are the apples nice?
Little pig!
Thank you kindly, says little piggy.
What time shall we start?
And he was!
I am sorry I frightened you!
But this was too much.
And, lo and behold!
But the Queen said, No!
But at long last he turned his face homewards.
What have I done?
And he fell a-dozing.
Then the same thing happened.
And, lo and behold!
And, lo and behold!
And they drank and drank, till not one drop remained.
If you do that, you may have my daughter.
There is nothing for it now but to fly at once.
It is in my room and the door is locked.
I shall go slower than you, for I have no toes on one foot!
Take out my veil-dagger and throw it down.
She did what she could, but it was no use.
So that was the last of the Magician giant.
Who are you?
I am Nix Naught Nothing, replied the young man.
Then you can go on to the castle and beg for a bed there.
So she took her pitcher to the pool to fill it.
So she spelled him asleep again.
Then he looked up and saw the lady in the tree.
Hide yourself and listen to her charm.
Then Nix Naught Nothing remembered everything.
And there was.
Oh, Vinegar, Vinegar!
We are clean ruined and done for!
Quit these vegetables!
And with that she fell to crying bitterly.
All we need is money to buy another.
So let us go out into the world and seek our fortunes.
But what about the furniture?
Then no one will be able to open it, will they?
It is only the wind in the trees.
So up in the tree he sate like a big bird until dawn came.
My goodness!
How Mr. and Mrs. Vinegar jumped for joy!
Now, Vinegar!
So we shall live in comfort for the rest of our days.
What a head you have, lovey!
Mind you make a good bargain, bawled his wife after him.
I always do, bawled back Mr. Vinegar.
I am the happiest man alive!
I shall be the happiest of men if I get that cow.
What will you take for your cow?
Then the feeding, and the milking, and the churning!
But, alas and alack!
Warm hands, warm heart!
Then he saw a man coming along the road with a stout stick.
What is the use of warm hands if your feet ache!
Done for you!
What are you laughing at?
At you, forsooth!
Ah, you fool!
There are as good ones in the shop as ever came out of it.
And that is the story of Mr. and Mrs. Vinegar.
Never before or since was there such another.
Where are you, you bad boy?
This is what happened.
So he just drew the string of the bag tight.
Who art thou, mannikin?
Whence dost come?
And where dost live?
From the Fairies I come.
When King Arthur shone, This Court was my home.
Goodness gracious me!
Where are you going, Henny-penny?
May I come with you?
Certainly, says Henny-penny.
Where are you going to, Henny-penny and Cocky-locky?
May I come with you?
Certainly, said Henny-penny and Cocky-locky.
May I come with you?
Why, of course, certainly, without doubt, why not?
Then Goosey-poosey went in, and,  Hrumph!
Then Ducky-daddles waddled down, and,  Hrumph!
Time for me to lay my egg.
Reverend father, replies she, I go to seek my fortune.
Bread and cheese and small-beer, father, says she, smiling.
Will it please you to partake of either?
Certainly, she said, pulling out her silver comb.
Then the first head spoke.
Altogether a right royal dowry.
Good morrow, says he.
Whither away so fast?
And what hast thou for dowry in bag and bottle?
Wilt thou not spare an old man something?
A likely story, says she.
Not I, scoffs she.
Not I, says she as well as she could.
So take that for your washing and combing.
But, lo and behold!
And there she was in a narrow, dark passage.
But at the end there was a chink of light.
But it is not so, nor it was not so.
And served him very well right.
So he agreed to take him, and off they set.
How dirty it was!
Night and morning she was for ever scolding him.
Nothing he did was good enough.
Puss soon saw to that, and he slept sound every night.
What do you think your cat will sell for?
As much money as would buy a stick to beat you with?
Lord Mayor of London!
But now you must hear what befell Mrs. Puss all this while.
Oh, make haste, do!
Off went the captain, while another dinner was got ready.
A friend, replied a voice.
God forbid!
Poor Dick hardly knew how to behave himself for joy.
They had several children.
What, said she, shall I do with this little sixpence?
I will go to market, and buy a little pig.
So she said to him, Dog!
She went a little further, and she met a stick.
So she said, Stick!
She went a little further, and she met a fire.
So she said, Fire!
She went a little further, and she met some water.
So she said, Water!
She went a little further, and she met an ox.
So she said, Ox!
She went a little further, and she met a butcher.
So she said, Butcher!
She went a little further, and she met a rope.
So she said, Rope!
She went a little further, and she met a rat.
So she said, Rat!
She went a little further, and she met a cat.
So she said, Cat!
So away went the old woman to the cow.
Go away, kitty!
So, one day, when she was quite tired out with saying, Sho!
What are ye a-feared of?
Naught but a wee bannock, quoth she.
Aye, says she, and reaches out her hand to it.
But the wee bannock just dodged.
Catch it, man!
Catch it if you can.
But the wee bannock just dodged.
Cast the clue at it, woman!
So in it ran and sate down by the trough.
But come in by.
And with that he tapped his fat stomach.
And with that he laughed, and tapped his fat stomach.
Janet, says the goodman, yon is a well-toasted wee bannock.
But the wee bannock played dodgings again.
And with that she cast the flax comb at it.
So it trundled in, and sate down by the fire.
Come and eat it!
Aye, mother!
Over there!
It will just be a wee bannock, says she.
I could eat the half of it, says he.
Cast your breeches at it, man!
I wish there were two of you!
And there were two!
For he snapped the wee bannock into halves with one bite.
Where are you going, Jack?
I am going to seek my fortune.
May I go with you?
Yes, said Jack, the more the merrier.
So on they went, Jack and the cat.
Jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt!
They went a little farther and they met a dog.
Where are you going, Jack?
I am going to seek my fortune.
May I go with you?
Yes, said Jack, the more the merrier.
So on they went, Jack, the cat, and the dog!
Jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt!
They went a little farther and they met a goat.
Where are you going, Jack?
I am going to seek my fortune.
May I go with you?
Yes, said Jack, the more the merrier.
So on they went, Jack, the cat, the dog, and the goat.
Jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt!
They went a little farther and they met a bull.
Where are you going, Jack?
I am going to seek my fortune.
May I go with you?
Yes, said Jack, the more the merrier.
Jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt!
They went a little farther and they met a rooster.
Where are you going, Jack?
I am going to seek my fortune.
May I go with you?
Yes, said Jack, the more the merrier.
Jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt, jiggelty-jolt!
That gold shall be mine, quoth Jack to himself.
I have found my fortune already.
Then he went to bed.
Cook him in a stew!
And each of the animals carried a portion of it.
Goodness me!
Now who could have left it in the ditch?
And with that she lifted the lid and looked inside.
And so it was, brimful of great gold coins.
But I do feel rich.
I feel awful rich!
So much the better!
Or maybe, Goody!
It was nothing but a lump of silver.
And me thinking it was a pot of gold!
I must have been dreaming.
But this is luck!
And I mistaking it for silver!
I must have been dreaming.
But this is luck!
I should never have slept a wink for fear of being robbed.
And this time she saw nothing but a big stone.
And to think I mistook it for iron.
I must have been dreaming.
It was a stone sure enough.
So she bent over it to unfasten the shawl end, when, Oh my!
Quite the luckiest body hereabouts.
My goodness!
Does she live a very long way off?
I wish you good luck, says the wolf politely.
And with that he trotted off.
So she knocked at the door.
Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up.
All the better to hug you with, says he.
But, Grandmamma, Grandmamma, what big legs you have!
All the better to run with, my dear.
All the better to hear with, my dear.
All the better to see you with, my dear!
All the better to eat you with, my dear!
Possible it is, quoth Merlin the Magician gravely.
For he also was brave indeed, danger did not dismay him.
One thing is to do, and one thing is not to do.
In this you must not fail.
Now the hen-wife looked at him and smiled.
Surely I can tell you, said she.
Go on a little farther.
Only remember to go round widershins.
If you go round with the sun the door will not open.
So good luck to you!
And it opened and let him in.
And the air was warm as it ever is in Elfland.
What have you here to do?
But sit you down, my dearest dear, Oh!
He told her how he had come to Elfland.
Whereupon he cried, I yield me.
Thou hast beaten me in fair fight.
Where are you going?
Marry, said the other, I will bring them over this bridge.
By Maid Marion, said he that was going thither, but I will.
You will not, said the one.
But they shall, said the other.
Help me, and lay my sack upon my shoulders.
Marry, said they, there is none at all.
A vengeance on her!
We did not make our hedge high enough.
Ah, gaffer, said the fellow, can you run to market alone?
I will send one after another after you.
Some went into one bush, and some went into another.
Who should bring them?
He said, A vengeance on them all.
I have many white herrings, said one.
I have many sprats, said another.
I have many red herrings, said the other.
I have much salt fish.
What shall we do to him?
Kill him, said one.
Chop him into pieces, said another.
Be it so, said all.
Some cried, Thou must go to Lancaster first.
Let him go.
Marry, said one, let us see about that.
Twelve of us came out.
Sir, said they, all the money we have.
And she answered as pat as may be, As I love my life.
Very good, my dear, said he, and gave her a kiss.
Then he turned to the youngest, who was also the prettiest.
Only mind you scrub the pots clean or cook will be at me.
So the maid had to up and out with the truth.
While as for her dancing...!
Young master never took his eyes off her.
For she felt certain he would dance with her.
It was a sight of all sights!
Never were such dancers!
So young, so handsome, so fine, so gay!
So they said, She is dreaming.
We hope her dreams are happy.
But next morning they were full of what she had missed.
Never was such a beautiful young gentleman as young master!
Never was such a beautiful young lady!
Never was such beautiful dancing!
Every one else had stopped theirs to look on.
Then Caporushes laughed.
He will find some one else.
If not he will die for love of the beautiful dancer.
If she could see him now she would have pity on him.
Then the butler took the cup upstairs on a silver salver.
And when he fished it up, lo!
And when she came he asked her who made the gruel.
Then the cook began to cry.
And who is Caporushes?
Then the young man sighed and fell back on his pillow.
Now every one far and near was asked to the wedding.
What is the matter?
But now I see she loved me best of all.
And after that they were all happy for evermore.
With that the tears did fall.
And slay them in a wood.
And now at last this wicked act Did by this means come out.
So the young man went to seek his fortune.
But the young man knew not.
But the young man knew not.
But the young man knew not.
A bridge, says the younger brother, quite fast.
So they all lived happily all the rest of their days.
And, lo and behold!
What is the matter, my friend?
But, you see, he was just sore mistaken.
Some wretched yokel or other.
But he kept his own counsel and said nothing at the time.
I will make your fortune.
But she begged hard for her life.
It is not my fault, she said.
I have done nothing.
It is Fate.
I will never see you or your son again until you desire it.
And with that he let her go.
And, lo and behold!
Let us drink a toast in her honour.
He said to her, What will you call me?
Master or mister, or whatever you please, sir, says she.
And what would you call this?
Bed or couch, or whatever you please, sir.
And what do you call these?
Breeches or trousers, or whatever you please, sir.
And what would you call her?
Fire or flame, or whatever you please, sir.
Water or wet, or whatever you please, sir.
And what do you call all this?
House or cottage, or whatever you please, sir.
See for yourself.
They are only three poor little girlies like our girlies.
Now this giant was not at all a straightforward giant.
He was a double-faced giant.
So he only said, Umph!
But the drawbridge was up.
Here is a girlie who has tricked the giant!
But Molly kept very still and held her breath.
So after a time he fell asleep, and soon he began to snore.
Never you dare to come again!
How they ran, and ran, and ran, and ran!
Never you dare to come again!
He had her fast between his finger and thumb.
Right you are!
Whatever is the matter?
Could ye but see what I see!!!
Well, he threw down the tree and ran after her.
Never was such a race.
Never you dare to come again!
The lad and the maiden were fast friends and true-loves.
Never till you have the money to keep her, was the reply.
No ham and eggs for me!
I can do better than that., Come, my table, be covered!
The innkeeper opened his eyes, but he said nothing, not he!
Now, father, may I marry my lass?
Not unless you can keep her, replied the father.
Father, I have a table which does all my bidding.
Let me see it, said the old man.
Stand aside, lass, said Jack to her, speaking roughly.
Thou hast no silver nor gold, stand off from the rest.
Up, stick, and bang them!
Whatever can that be?
Go and open the door this instant.
To no purpose, for alas, and alack-a-day!
But, for a wonder, her stepmother did not seem very angry.
Come, put your head on my lap.
So the little girl fetched one.
So the child fetched an axe.
So they grieved and grieved.
Now when summer came the wild rose tree flowered.
Stone dead!
Sing that beautiful song again, said the cobbler.
Stone dead!
Oh, what a beautiful song!
And the second miller put aside his tool and listened.
Stone, sang the bird.
Then the third miller put aside his tool and listened.
How it thunders!
See what fine things the thunder has brought!
How it thunders!
It is true, he said when he came back.
The thunder does bring fine things!
Perhaps it has got something for me!
So that was an end of her.
Well, they did the same as I.
Scots a dialect of English!
Scots tales the same as English!
Horror and Philistinism!
Had they stopped here it might have been borne.
Poison, I hear you say?
Why, they poisoned so many that it fairly bred a plague.
Show him in, said the Mayor, and in he stepped.
A queer fellow, truly.
For out of every hole the rats came tumbling.
As for getting near him there were too many rats.
Such an easy job, too!
Just getting into a boat and playing a pipe!
Will you not take twenty?
Would you threaten us, you strolling vagabond?
Very well, said the Piper, and he smiled a quiet smile.
All the while, the elders watched and waited.
They mocked no longer now.
That I will, to be sure, said she.
And they lived as happy as the day was long.
One day, Jan said to his wife, Wife can you milk-y?
Oh, yes, Jan, I can milk-y.
Mother used to milk-y, when I lived home.
So he went to market and bought her ten red cows.
Oh, yes, Jan, I can serve pigs.
Mother used to serve pigs when I lived home.
So Jan went to market and bought her some pigs.
Oh, yes, Jan, I can bake-y.
Mother used to bake-y when I lived home.
Oh, yes, Jan, I can brew-y.
Mother used to brew-y when I lived home.
That is for Hereafterthis, my dear.
What do you please to want?
What do you mean, wife?
It was an opening of a door in the side of the hill.
They never saw such a bonny man before.
He had a golden ball in each hand.
He said he would.
Presently he heard steps coming upstairs.
He hid behind the door, and was as still as a mouse.
Then the hangman said, Hast thee done thy prayers?
Now, lass, put thy head into the noose.
Thou must be hung at once.
And he took her home, and they lived happy ever after.
The little boy looked at her with surprise.
And what do they call ye?
Just my own self too!
She certainly showed him some fine games.
Who did it?
Just my own self too!
She saw nought the first day.
The second day she did the same, and saw nought.
She ran in and told the old wife what she saw.
So they took her into the coach and galloped off.
So they took her in, and off they set.
The second day she did the same, and saw nought.
So she did as he said, and was wonderfully refreshed.
Long she sat, and aye she wept, till she wearied.
He heard, and turned to her.
He began to look everywhere for the poor creature.
But though he looked and looked, he could see nought.
Thankee, master, says Tom, quite meek like.
Wilt have a wife?
I can give thee the finest lass in the town.
Wilt be rich?
Only say the word.
Tom scratched his head.
But when he went to the work, there was none to do!
Ho, ho, Tom!
Tom could never rightly mind what he said next.
And did it come true, sayst thou?
And then she had no more care about it.
Why should it when I am but a fellow-servant?
And so it was.
And then she was away to bed and to sleep.
And so it was.
Something is up now though.
And then William told about the clothes.
But he did not tell of the feathers.
And then he bade her give the men back their savings.
But how am I to know the house?
Oh, nothing in the world is easier, said I.
Now this Sir G. Vans was a giant, and a bottle-maker.
Very well, I thank you, says I.
Have some breakfast with me?
With all my heart, says I.
Hang him, says I.
So he took me into his garden to show me the curiosities.
Take as much as thou canst carry, said the farmer.
So Tom laid down his rope and began to make his bottle.
Now, said he, see what a man can do.
Stand and deliver!
What should I deliver?
Your money, sirrah, said they.
You shall give me better words for it first, said Tom.
But you shall see that Tom sometimes met his match.
Whence come you and whither are you going?
Ay, said Tom, methinks he might be master with you.
Sure, you do but jest, said Tom.
Let me first get a twig, said Tom.
Now tinker where are you?
Who gave you authority to come this way?
See how many heads hang on yonder tree.
Yours shall hang higher than all the rest for a warning.
And very good weapons they were found!
Out came the giant and began to stare at Tom.
What, said Tom, are you drunk with my strong beer already?
But who can have left it here?
But she could see no one.
So he came home discouraged.
Is that all?
Do you think you could tell her again?
She said Yes, and they were married.
So Jack sweated and overtook his father.
I shall return to-morrow and pay you all.
No, no, said the king, cannot one of the men do the errand?
You and your son are to stop here.
But how will it do if I send my own son?
That will do.
So there he was, both crooked and straight!
But she only laughed, and shook her golden head.
You must tell it.
Hout, quoth Willie, cast the clue at it.
But I like a bannock and cheese.
The smith was making horse-nails.
Come your way in by here.
Inside it runs to the fireside.
The goodman was cloving lint, and the goodwife heckling.
Hit it over the back with the clove.
But the bannock played dodgings.
Hout, tout, quoth the wife, and made the heckle flee at it.
But it was too clever for her.
Ho, Jock, quoth the goodwife, here come.
Ay, mother, where is it?
Run over on that side.
Jock fell among the sprits.
The goodman cast a binning, and the goodwife the spurtle.
But it was too clever for Jock and her both.
Quoth he, I could eat the half of it.
Cast your breeches at it!
The fox had had no meat for two days.
And that was the end of the wee bannock.
Johnny Gloke, Kilt fifty flies at one stroke.
Thus watching he formed his plan of action.
The other denied in anger that he had thrown the pebble.
Thus was Johnny Gloke a second time victorious.
Good-day, missis, said the fool.
I be come to see thee.
Oh, fairly, answered he.
But they say I be a fool.
Ay, so thou art, nodded she, and threw away a bad potato.
I see that too.
I keep no brains for sale.
Well, see now.
And she took up her potatoes and went into her house.
The fool took off his cap and scratched his head.
And he went on home.
Presently he came to a cottage with a lass at the door.
Shall I marry thee, lass?
When he got home his mother was on the doorstep.
Very good, said his mother, now thou canst get a wife.
But I gave her my luck penny, said the fool.
So down he sat and began to drink.
I feel another man now, so smart.
What dost thou want with me now?
And she went into the house and shut the door.
Dang it, said the fool.
And he went off home.
Next morning his wife went out to the shed, and see!
Tick, tick, went the clock, but he did not hear it now.
Round and round flew the imps, picking up the bones.
The cock crew, Away they flew.
Would you like to hear it?
At last he could bear it no longer.
Bow, wow, says Jack.
Friend, said he, I wonder much at your fruitless standing.
Have you no wares to sell?
No, indeed, quoth the pedlar.
And you do not beg for alms.
Not so long as I can keep myself.
Right heartily did the shopkeeper laugh.
Get thee home, and mind thy business.
And there it stands to this day to witness if I lie.
So she started for the town.
The girl milked the cow into the pails that stood by.
My branches are breaking, it is so heavy.
And the girl said, Of course I will, you poor tree.
Then she went on again till she came to a house.
The witch told the girl what work she was to do.
This happened again and again.
So the girl started to go off home.
So the apple-tree hid her.
So the cow hid her.
And the cow said, No, mother, not for seven year.
So the baker said, Look in the oven.
The other sister then thought she would go and do the same.
And she went the same way.
Well, she thought she would be off at once.
Who can tell?
Nay, not for a couple of hours yet, said she.
Straight she went to the bog edge and looked about her.
She pulled and twisted and fought, but it was no good.
She was fast, and must stay fast.
Oh, but the man cried with joy to see the light again.
And all the Things joined in with a great Ho, ho!
And they began again.
And Ho, ho!
And Ho, ho!
And again they all shouted with spite and ill-will.
And still the days went on, and the new Moon never came.
If ye hear of aught, come and tell me.
A Son of Adam A man was one day working.
It was very hot, and he was digging.
Then he lifted it up a bit more, and out popped a mouse.
With that the tears did fall.
The next night the Hobyahs came again, and said, Hobyah!
The next night the Hobyahs came again, and said, Hobyah!
The next night the Hobyahs came again, and said, Hobyah!
The next night the Hobyahs came again, and said, Hobyah!
The next night the Hobyahs came again, and said, Hobyah!
The next night the Hobyahs came again, and said, Hobyah!
Aye, says she, and went on stirring.
Maybe, says she.
And he scratched his head and twisted his hat.
Fine, says she.
And, and, the beasts is fattening, says he.
They are, says she.
Have you any brains for to sell?
But, says he, scratching his head, how can I do that?
Tell me this then, what runs without feet?
And she clapt the book together, and turned her back.
So off the fool went to tell his mother.
Oh, mother, mother!
What art talking about?
Could thee do it?
Ay, I can, says she.
Surely, says she.
And mend my clouts?
I can that, says she.
Can thee so?
Tell me the first What runs without feet?
Why, water!
It do, says he, and scratched his head.
Why, the sun!
Faith, it be!
The wise woman nodded her head.
Where be they?
Well, my young son, how are you this morning?
Now, my young prince, mind what I tell you.
You need not fear.
There are no snakes here.
Well, my boy, I shall see how you will get on.
At last he comes in sight of the castle.
He ties his horse safe to a tree, and pulls out his watch.
No sooner said than done.
And tell me all you did, and all you saw there.
Did you see my two brothers?
How did they look?
I liked them much.
They told me many things what to do.
Well, did you go to the castle?
Yes, my uncle.
And will you tell me what you see in there?
Did you see the young lady?
Yes, I saw her, and plenty of other frightful things.
You will have to cut my head off in the morning.
Well, I am sure, how lucky!
Now she says, Have you not another son?
He is saved, O King.
Do you call him your brother?
Well, he has been better to me than my brothers.
With a smile upon his face, he gives a graceful bow.
And there we will leave them.
So he summoned the Abbot of Canterbury to his presence.
I hear it of thee, thou keepest far greater state than I.
Your Majesty jesteth, stammered the Abbot.
Thou wilt find it no jest, said the King.
Now, cheer up, Sir Abbot, said the shepherd.
A fool may perhaps answer what a wise man knows not.
At the least I can die in your place.
And to that, thou canst not pass for me.
But I can and I will, Sir Abbot.
In a cowl, who will know me for what I am?
I am ready to answer your Majesty, said he.
How soon may I ride this round world about?
That is easy, your Grace, said he.
Loud laughed the King.
Well caught.
And tell the Abbot from me that he has my pardon.
She did so, and found some nice bread.
And so it went on from day to day.
You must bide at home and make the dinner.
But what will become of the dinner?
But mind you come home first.
The kitchen nook is good enough for you.
Yes, just like that!
Now, how can I tell?
And what do you think they were carrying?
Yes, just like that!
I did feel queer, that I did!
Where was I?
Look at Old Tom, look at Old Tom!
She came at last to a bush of broom and began plucking it.
Where come ye from, Tamlane, Tamlane?
From Elfland I come, said young Tamlane.
The Queen of Elfland has made me her knight.
But how did you get there, Tamlane?
I was in Elfland.
Oh can you not be saved?
Tell me if aught I can do will save you, Tamlane?
One only thing is there for my safety.
But how shall I know you, Tamlane?
The first court of Elves that come by let pass.
But how to save you, Tamlane?
So one fine day off she went to find them.
Have you seen any?
Oh, yes, my bonnie lassie, said the mill-dam.
So she went on till she came to a brooklet.
Have you seen any?
Yes, indeed, my bonny lassie, said the Brooklet.
They glint on my banks at night.
So on she went till she came to the Good Folk.
Why, yes, my bonny lassie, said the Good Folk.
Will you give me a lift, for all my bones are an-aching.
I must away home to my own folk.
Will ye show me the way?
Yes, indeed, said she.
Get on my back and hold fast.
Steward, how are you, my old boy?
How do things go on at home?
MR. G. Poor mag!
How came he to die?
Over-ate himself, Sir.
MR. G. Did he indeed?
Why, what did he get that he liked so well?
MR. G. How came he to get so much horseflesh?
MR. G. What!
MR. G. And why were they over-worked?
To carry water, Sir.
Sure, Sir, to put out the fire.
MR. G. Fire!
I think, Sir, it must have been the torches.
MR G. Torches!
MR. G. My mother dead?
Ay, poor lady, she never looked up after it.
MR. G. After what?
The loss of your father.
MR. G. My father gone too?
MR. G. Heard of what?
MR. G. What?
Puddock he would a-wooing rid Sword and pistol by his side.
Yes, kind Sir, I am within, Softly do I sit and spin.
Madam, I am come to woo, Marriage I must have of you.
Of course, he did all the little bull-calf told him.
Well fought, little bull-calf!
If it has to be him it must be him.
Look at that, now!
So off he went to his mother at the house.
And wee, wee Mannie went off and told the big, big Coo.
Oh, what can I do for ye in return?
The mother dragged in her girl.
But old Dame Habetrot came to her aid.
The grey goose she ran round the hay-stack, Oh, ho!
But the cook was very cruel to her and led her a sad life.
But she only briskly shook her ears, and said nothing.
So Catskin said to the cook, Oh, how I should like to go!
When that came, he again asked her where she lived.
All happened as before.
Never, said the lady, and rushed from the room.
So she had to give way, and summoned Catskin to her.
Liver and lights and gall and all!
Liver and lights and gall and all!
Pray God send no more!
Pray God send no more!
This was all his cry.
Pray God send plenty more!
Pray God send plenty more!
Pray God send the soul to heaven!
Pray God send the soul to heaven!
A dog and a cat agoing to be hung!
A dog and a cat agoing to be hung!
I wish you much joy!
I wish you much joy!
The one is out, I wish the other was!
The one is out, I wish the other was!
The one is out, I wish the other was!
The one side gives good light, I wish the other did!
At last young Lambton felt a mighty tug at his line.
At last, quoth he, a bite worth having!
What ails thee, my son?
Look you and see if you know him.
What to do?
So it went on for seven years.
To the Wise Woman went the Childe, and asked her advice.
I would give my life, said the Childe.
Mayhap thou wilt do so, said she.
But hear me, and mark me well.
Thou, and thou alone, canst kill the Worm.
This I will do, said Childe Lambton.
Do this, and all will be well with thee and thine.
Swear, and fail not.
There he had his armour studded with spear-heads all over.
He raised it, brought it down, and cut the Worm in two.
One half fell into the river, and was carried swiftly away.
Where are you going?
Marry, said the other, I will bring them over this bridge.
By Maid Marion, said he that was going thither, but I will.
You will not, said the one.
But they shall, said the other.
Help me, and lay my sack upon my shoulders.
Marry, said they, there is none at all.
A vengeance on her!
We did not make our hedge high enough.
Ah, gaffer, said the fellow, can you run to market alone?
I will send one after another after you.
Who should bring them?
He said, A vengeance on them all.
I have many white herrings, said one.
I have many sprats, said another.
I have many red herrings, said the other.
I have much salt fish.
What shall we do to him?
Kill him, said one.
Chop him into pieces, said another.
Be it so, said all.
Some cried, Thou must go to Lancaster first.
Let him go.
Marry, said one, let us see about that.
Sir, said they, all the money we have.
Put it in your pocket, said the brothers.
That also was put with his other treasures.
How will you get it out again?
With a crooked stick, replied Jack, producing the hazel.
Where did that come from?
No, no, said the king, not so fast.
You have still an ordeal to go through.
Then off goes your head, said the king.
But you need not try unless you like.
At last he made up his mind.
And taking his bottle and bag, he trudged to the court.
Oh, shepherd, said the lady, I have caught you napping!
Noa, sweet ally, I was busy a-feeshing.
I do not despair of the future.
Endings of stories are even less varied.
In the present volume, rhyme occurs in Nos.
So he gets up and went along.
S. Baring-Gould.
Here it has been used with romantic effect.
If THOU, then what this sensual impotence?
His companion transfers it to his own leg.
The yokel awaking is perplexed like the pantheist.
If I, the pumpkin why on YOU?
If YOU, then where am I, and WHO?
I owe the following to the kindness of the Rev.
Mr. Todd Martin, of Belfast.
S. Baring-Gould.
He accordingly digs deeper and finds another pot of gold.
The case is strongest for drolls of this kind.
Stallybrass, pp.
Prof. Crane, No.
It occurs in Swift and in modern Italian folk-lore.
Proudfit as current in a family deriving from Perth.
The Sleeping Beauty is of course found in Perrault.
Even this fact, however, is not too well substantiated.
This would have sounded somewhat bold in prose.
Oesterley, where see his notes.
Pauli was a fifteenth century worthy or unworthy.
I have used Nos.
Slaying of Hearth abode.
Heroine Helpful animal.
Slaying of disguise helpful animal.
Menial Revivified bones.
Old woman advice.
Help at grave.
Revivified bones.
Magic dresses Magic dresses.
Magic dresses.
Flight Flight Flight twofold.
Mutilated foot Mutilated foot.
Mutilated foot.
Bird witness.
False bride.
False bride.
False bride.
Happy Bird witness.
Bird witness.
Bird witness marriage.
House for Happy marriage.
Happy marriage.
Happy marriage.
Menial heroine.
Menial heroine.
Menial heroine.
Helpful animal.
Helpful cantrips.
Henwife aid.
Spy on heroine.
Spy on heroine.
Eye sleep Eye sleep.
Meeting-place Meeting place threefold.
Slaying of Slaying of Flight twofold.
Flight threefold.
Revivified Revivified Lost shoe.
Magic dresses.
Step-sister Shoe marriage Shoe marriage substitute.
Golden shoe gift Heroine under Mutilated foot.
Meeting-place Meeting-place Happy marriage.
Happy marriage.
Flight threefold.
Flight Substituted Substituted bride threefold.
Lost shoe Lost shoe.
Jonah heroine.
Jonah heroine.
Shoe marriage Shoe marriage Three Three test.
Mutilated foot.
Mutilated foot.
False bride.
Villain Nemesis.
Bird witness.
Bird witness.
Happy marriage.
Happy marriage.
Turning to the Celtic variants, these divide into two sets.
The original is in broad Scots, which I have anglicised.
I have respelt and euphemised the bladder.
I have again anglicised.
The class is well represented in these isles.
I have abridged and to some extent rewritten.
The two versions supplement one another.
Who shall say which is which, as Mr. Lang would observe.
In most cases Mr. Clouston quotes Eastern analogies.
It is named Chosei Furo, or Longevity.
Crunch, crunch!
Where had the dragon gone in such a short space of time?
Do you think you can grant it to me?
And what is it you have to ask of me!
I am powerless to save them.
I beg you to have pity upon me.
Will you not help me and kill my enemy the centipede?
The centipede!
The centipede!
Those two balls of fire are its eyes.
It is coming for its prey!
Now is the time to kill it.
Hidesato showed not the least sign of fear.
He tried to calm the Dragon King.
I shall surely kill the centipede.
Just bring me my bow and arrows.
The centipede was invulnerable to weapons!
He looked across the waters.
But this was no ordinary centipede.
Hidesato determined to try his last chance.
At last the dreadful night was over.
Day dawned beautiful and clear.
The centipede was gone from the mountain.
The gratitude of the Dragon King knew no bounds.
Another feast was prepared, more sumptuous than the first.
Second, a bag of rice.
Third, a roll of silk.
Fourth, a cooking pot.
Fifth, a bell.
The cooking pot was wonderful, too.
If I have made a mistake I beg you to forgive me!
But not so.
I suppose you took my starch with that tongue!
Now you may see what it is like to go without it!
In the evening the old man came home.
Still no sparrow was to be seen.
Horrid little bird, why did it eat all my starch?
How could you be so cruel?
Is there nothing to be done?
Having decided this he was able to go to sleep at last.
Where, oh where, does my tongue-cut sparrow stay!
And above all she was a fairy.
Never had the old man enjoyed himself so much.
Where have you been all this time?
Why do you come back so late?
You must help me open it.
And they both sat down before the box and opened it.
Thanks to my good little sparrow!
Just think what we have lost.
We might have had twice as much silver and gold as this.
You are certainly an old fool!
She would not listen to one word he said.
They had not long to wait.
She hastened to the door and knocked loudly.
I only hope this may be a lesson to you in the future!
Here, boys, go on, go on!
I should like to have it so much!
Why should we?
We caught it ourselves.
Look, boys, you can buy anything you like with this money.
See what good boys you are to listen to me.
Poor thing!, there, there!
The next morning Urashima went out as usual in his boat.
Indeed, said Urashima, that is very polite of you.
Come up into the boat.
It must be very far away, if it exists at all!
Is that really so?
You need not swim yourself.
Try at once!
This is strange indeed!
Down through the water the tortoise dived.
Ya, exclaimed Urashima.
And here we are, and you must please walk from here.
Please show him the way.
Urashima Sama, Urashima Sama!
Urashima enjoyed himself with all his heart.
What can have happened to them all this time?
I must go back at once without letting one more day pass.
And he began to prepare for the journey in great haste.
But now I must say good-by.
I must go back to my old parents.
Where is the haste?
Stay with me yet another day only!
Do not think that I wish to leave you.
It is not that.
I must go and see my old parents.
Let me go for one day and I will come back to you.
You must not open this box, whatever happens!
If you open it something dreadful will happen to you!
Now promise me that you will never open this box!
My name is Urashima Taro.
Where have my parents gone whom I left here?
Are you Urashima Taro?
Yes, said the fisherman, I am Urashima Taro!
He could not possibly be alive now!
Till four or five days ago I lived on this spot.
Tell me what I want to know without more joking, please.
Perhaps you are his spirit come to revisit your old home?
Why do you mock me?
I am no spirit!
Urashima was lost in bewilderment and trouble.
He seemed to be in a strange dream.
There was no use in staying here any longer.
He must get back to his beautiful wife beyond the sea.
But which was the way?
He could not find it alone!
Suddenly he remembered the box, the tamate-bako.
There is nothing else for me to do now.
Yes, yes, I will open the box and look in!
And what did he find?
Poor Urashima!
Their only neighbor was a bad and malicious badger.
Then he laid traps for the wicked animal.
She looked tired and old.
You might untie me, for I promise not to try to escape.
I am so tired and sore tied up like this.
Towards sunset he left his work and turned to go home.
Look out for the bones in the kitchen!
The old man was left behind alone.
He could hardly believe what he had seen and heard.
After a while he came round and burst into tears.
He cried loudly and bitterly.
He rocked himself to and fro in his hopeless grief.
Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear!
The old man told him all that had happened.
This time the rabbit made the badger go first.
Oh, that is nothing.
What an unlucky fellow you are!
The badger thanked him and begged him to apply it at once.
He rolled over and over and howled loudly.
This was just what the rabbit wanted, so he agreed.
They both got into their boats and set out.
He cried out in great fear to the rabbit to help him.
Thus at last he kept his promise to the old farmer.
The old farmer thanked him with tears in his eyes.
THE shinansha, OR THE SOUTH POINTING CARRIAGE.
Kotei was the son of the Emperor Yuhi.
Soon after this her son Kotei came into the world.
His early reign was greatly troubled by the rebel Shiyu.
Kotei again declared war against Shiyu.
The battle began in earnest.
Here he sat down on the bank and was lost in thought.
It was autumn.
As it came nearer Kotei saw that it was a great Dragon.
This is a messenger from Heaven.
My time here is finished!
We wish to come too.
Now he fell in love with a beautiful lady and married her.
She called him Kintaro or the Golden Boy.
You can imagine how strong he was!
Great was the fun they all had together.
Kintaro said, Here is a place for a good game.
What do you all say to a wrestling match?
I shall give a prize to the one who wins in each round.
Deer, you are to be umpire!
I will be umpire.
Are you ready?
The hare at last gained on the monkey.
My foot slipped and I tumbled.
This he soon managed to do.
The bear came forward as umpire.
Now, we will all go home.
Come along!
So saying, Kintaro led the way while the animals followed.
Bridge there was none.
The river rushed don, don on its way.
I will make a good bridge for you all in a few minutes.
There, said Kintaro, what do you think of my bridge?
The four animals followed.
Whose son can he be?
I will find out before this day is done.
How late you are to-day.
I feared that something had happened to you.
Where have you been all the time?
Now tell me who is the strongest of all?
There was no need for me to wrestle with any of them.
But next to you then, who is the strongest?
The bear comes next to me in strength, answered Kintaro.
And after the bear?
Listen to me, little boy!
He would like to join the sport too!
He slipped off his clogs and entered the cottage.
Yama-uba and her son were both taken by surprise.
Who are you?
At last the old man desisted, declaring it a drawn game.
You are, indeed, a very strong child.
Hardly able to believe what I saw I followed you home.
You are very kind to take so much interest in my son.
You need not trouble yourself about that.
To tell you the truth I am no woodcutter!
I am one of the great generals of Japan.
What do you say to this?
Kimbo, said his mother, mind and be a good boy.
He was by far the strongest of them all.
Lord Raiko ordered Kintaro to the rescue.
Is not this the story of a great hero?
And their prayer was answered.
Though I die, you must grow up a good girl.
I die with the hope that you will grow up a model woman.
Very different in character, alas!
On this momentous occasion she played well.
This poisoned wine she put into a bottle.
Into another similar bottle she poured some good wine.
You are both so good and happy.
And she filled two cups from the different bottles.
But this was of no avail.
At last the day came and her poem was finished.
Strange indeed it seemed to all those standing round.
After this the Emperor soon recovered his health.
That one was her stepmother.
Her envy and jealousy burned in her heart like fire.
Katoda, her vassal, was bound to obey his mistress.
He was nearly ill with anxiety.
My father, my father!
It is indeed you, oh, my father!
Long, long ago there lived a man called Sentaro.
The idea of falling ill or dying made him very wretched.
He could not get away from it.
Whoever drank of this wonderful draught lived forever.
You, Sentaro, are fond of good living and of every comfort.
Sentaro obeyed wonderingly.
On and on they went for thousands of miles.
After several days they reached an island.
The crane flew some distance inland and then alighted.
Everything was upside down.
He had wished to escape from dying.
Vainly they tried to imagine what death could be like.
Sentaro was delighted.
He was the only happy man on the island.
This caused him great annoyance.
He tried to stop the bird in vain.
Sentaro fell with it.
He looked round, but there was no ship in sight.
Long, long ago, there lived an old bamboo wood-cutter.
They stood there in all weathers, in sunshine and in rain.
In this hopeless state the winter passed.
Will you refuse to do as I wish?
Oh, why, said the Princess in distress, must I do this?
I have no wish to marry now.
What more can you demand?
This was to test them.
She returned it at once and refused to see him.
He gave up now all hopes of ever winning the Princess.
But she remained silent and looked very sad.
Then the man did not scruple to make up a long story.
If it were the real thing it would not burn.
So the Third Knight failed also.
The Knight became desperate.
Her only answer was to hide her face in her sleeves.
But the Princess stopped him.
Her figure faded from his sight while he looked.
These little songs always gave him pleasure.
The men returned and told His Majesty all that had passed.
All were well trained archers, with bows and arrows.
Even the Emperors men would be powerless.
The night wore on!
We put the gold in the bamboos for you to find.
I pray you to look elsewhere.
Rest not here another moment.
The messenger led her forth and placed her in the chariot.
I must not forget my good friend the Emperor.
Do not be anxious, I will come back soon, said the man.
But he knew that he must go, for the call was imperative.
I know, for I asked him to bring you a doll.
Both the man and his wife rejoiced to find each other well.
Here, he said to the little girl, is a present for you.
What is it that you have given me?
The good and gentle wife and mother was one day taken ill.
I am sure that nothing can save me now.
This I give you before I die.
Suddenly she sat up.
And the woman began to weep afresh.
How is your life in danger here?
I will tell you since you ask me.
Your daughter dislikes me as her step-mother.
The girl had for a long time past been very unhappy.
But she soon found that her efforts were in vain.
Morning and evening she wept over the remembrance.
Her father found her occupied in this way.
And what is that that you have hidden in your sleeve?
Never had he spoken to her in such a tone.
She sat dumb and shamefaced, unable to reply.
You have certainly changed, my daughter!
What has made you so disobedient and unfaithful?
But she saw that she must speak and clear herself somehow.
I am still your obedient child.
Indeed, I am.
He wished to clear up his doubts once for all.
Then why are you always alone in your room these days?
This, she said, is what you saw me looking at just now.
And so you have kept it all this time?
What do you mean?
How stupid I am!
At last I understand.
You are truly a faithful child.
How clever it was of her to tell you to do this.
And here the father wept.
I am ashamed!
I am ashamed!
I did not know what a filial child you were.
I shall think of you as a child that I have borne myself.
Her patience and goodness were rewarded at last.
One day as the sun was setting, a priest came to the plain.
I am a traveler!
I am very sorry for you.
And in this way he pressed the old woman to let him stay.
The pilgrim was only too glad to do as he was told.
He took off his sandals and entered the hut.
I will go and cook some supper for you.
She then went to the kitchen to cook some rice.
You must stay and take care of the house while I am gone.
Then she left him and went out.
Now mind what I tell you!
He got up and began to move slowly towards the back room.
He must find out.
She will not know that I have looked unless I tell her.
What he saw froze the blood in his veins.
The sickening smell made him faint.
How horrible!
What awful den have I come to in my travels?
May Buddha help me or I am lost.
He ran on, redoubling his speed, pretending not to hear.
There is nothing else to be done.
What am I to do.
There is, I know, a wild bear living in the forest near by.
I have often heard tell of his wisdom.
I will go and try.
There was no time to lose.
Good Mr. Boar, I have heard of your excellent wisdom.
I am in great trouble, you alone can help me.
What do you advise me to do?
I know how clever you are!
Oh, yes, said the monkey, he has one infant son.
The monkey thanked the boar many times and then went home.
Then all happened as the boar had planned.
Would it not be wise for us to make a change?
Your idea is not a bad one at all.
He baited his hook and then threw it into the sea clumsily.
What is the matter?, what have you done?
It is just what I expected.
The mistake of our trying unfamiliar tasks is soon seen!
And you have done badly.
Look to it that you find it and return it to me quickly.
He was at last obliged to give up all hope of finding it.
I cannot forgive you unless you bring me back my own hook.
What are you doing alone in such a place?
Yes, I am he, answered the unhappy young man.
I have hunted this shore all over, but alas!
But who are you?
I am sorry to hear what misfortune has befallen you.
You must indeed be anxious.
Then what can I do?
I think that would be the best way.
Large katsura trees overshadowed it.
He saw that in their hands they carried golden buckets.
No ordinary mortal would give away a jewel so freely.
Will you not honor us by telling us who you are?
This kind old man also showed me how to come.
Now you know how it is I am here and why.
I want to ask Ryn Jin, if he knows where the lost hook is.
Will you be so kind as to take me to your father?
And do you think he will see me?
Condescend to remember us forever!
And he bowed again, and thanked the Sea King.
You need not thank me, said Ryn Jin.
It is I who must thank you for coming.
Who has ever heard of such a marvelous place?
They sat looking at each other and at the Dragon King.
Where is your proof?
For this reason I think the hook may be in his throat.
You had better send for him at once!
Will you send for him and inquire into the matter.
Then our innocence will be proved.
Send for him at once!
He led him before the King.
The TAI sat there looking frightened and ill.
Answer, O TAI!
It is only too true!
So I hope you will pardon me.
O please make haste and pull it out!
He then washed it and brought it to the King.
So he begged the Sea King to forgive his subject.
The years pass swiftly when any one is truly happy.
With your gracious permission, I will take my leave to-day.
I hope to make you another visit some day.
Please give up the idea of my staying longer now.
I hope you will not forget us.
These two gems are called the nanjiu and the kanjiu.
Never had he seen such a huge creature.
Then the old man said Chin, chin!
But Shiro went on barking and digging with all his might.
At last all the gold coins lay shining on the ground.
Thus in one day the poor old man became rich.
You must find them for me!
Where are they?
This soon gave way to anger.
Day after day went by and the good old man waited in vain.
Out of the trunk he made a mortar.
A strange thing happened!
He found him sitting by a big fire made of pieces of wood.
I would have given you as many as ever you wanted.
A wonderful thing happened!
I shall look on.
Wonderful, indeed, was the result!
The withered tree at once burst into full bloom!
This would be the simplest task of all.
Here comes the old man who can make dead trees blossom!
I have nothing to do to-day.
The satisfaction of false old man can now be imagined.
That is strange!
I thought there was only one Hana-Saka-Jijii in the world!
Has he now some disciples?
I am the true Hana-Saka-Jijii.
The one who came to you before was only my disciple!
Then you must be more skillful than the other.
Try what you can do and let me see!
But all to no effect.
From this imprisonment the wicked old man was never freed.
He was called Rin Jin, or the Dragon King of the Sea.
So he decided to take a wife.
It is just as you say!
Tell me what it is you want for the Queen?
I want the liver of a live monkey!
The liver of a live monkey!
But where are we most likely to find a monkey?
If only you could capture one of these monkeys?
How can any of my people capture a monkey?
That has been my difficulty too, said the doctor.
Let us send him to the Island of Monkeys to catch one.
The only way is to play a trick on one!
How can I play a trick on a monkey?
This is what you must do, said the wily chief steward.
But how am I to get the monkey here?
You must carry him on your back.
So the jelly fish slowly walked towards the pine-tree.
A very fine day, answered the monkey from the tree.
I have never seen you in this part of the world before.
Where have you come from and what is your name?
My name is kurage or jelly fish.
I am one of the servants of the Dragon King.
I am very glad to see you, said the monkey.
I have often heard of it, but I have never seen it!
Then you ought most surely to come.
Is it so beautiful as all that?
I have got him at last!
I must now go back.
There is no difficulty about that.
I can carry you on my back.
That will be troubling you too much, said the monkey.
I can do it quite easily.
Keep very still, Mr. monkey, said the jelly fish.
Why is my liver so important to you?
The doctor means to cut me open and then take my liver out!
Why I shall die!
You are quite mistaken, said the monkey.
If I had only guessed of what you were in need.
I have several livers.
Have you left your liver behind you?
The monkey was of no good without a liver.
Finally the jelly fish stopped and told the monkey so.
Well, said the monkey, that is soon remedied.
But remember your promise!
That promise was false, and anyhow it is now broken!
Now the day of reckoning had come for the jelly fish.
He quaked all over as he told his story.
The punishment was a horrible one.
The persimmon-seed is as hard and uneatable as a stone.
How delicious they will be to eat!
He consented to go with the crab to pick the fruit for him.
The persimmon is as hard as stone when it is unripe.
In a short time the bee and the chestnut arrived.
Dead crabs have no mouths!
Who is there to tell that I am the murderer?
What is done cannot be undone!
So the monkey returned home from his walk quite content.
He told himself he had nothing now to fear.
We were great friends as you know.
I accept your kind invitation with many thanks.
I shall be delighted to do honor to my poor old friend!
And he screwed some false tears from his eyes.
But aloud he thanked the monkey politely and went home.
Here the young chief mourner came to receive him.
Time passed and still he did not return.
At last the monkey became impatient.
I am tired of waiting so long.
He lay crushed and in great pain, quite unable to get up.
Then you, are, my, enemy?
Of course, said the young crab.
Can you still lie?
I will soon put an end to your breath!
Now the hare wanted very much to cross over to Inaba.
This is very lucky!
Now I shall be able to get my wish.
I will ask the crocodile to carry me across the sea!
I wonder who it was that spoke to me just now!
Was it you, Mr. Hare?
You must be very lonely all by yourself!
Can you not see that for yourself?
The crocodile was very conceited.
The hare, meanwhile, waited patiently on the shore.
Look, Mr. Hare!
Did you ever see so many crocodiles?
I did not believe this was possible.
Now let me count you all!
And he was just about to run away as fast as he could.
So some of them ran after the hare and caught him.
Then all the young men passed on.
Who can have treated you so cruelly?
Then I will tell you of a good remedy, said the man.
The hare was very glad to be told what to do, so kindly.
It is my earnest wish to do something for you in return.
Please tell me who you are?
Oh, I did not know that you were Okuni-nushi-no-Mikoto.
How kind you have been to me!
This is the end of the story.
But what became of the crocodiles nobody knows.
It was all but impossible to go on.
We cannot clear the roads and fight as well.
So he now bade his army halt by the way.
He hardly knew himself, so changed was he.
What a beautiful woman!
Where has she come from?
Wait one moment!
Yamato relaxed his hold somewhat and said.
Why should I pause, thou villain?
Surely you are more than mortal?
You are indeed a strong man to have so easily overcome us.
Allow me to give you a new name.
From henceforth you shall be known as Yamato Take.
Our title I bequeath to you as the bravest man in Yamato.
And with these noble words, Takeru fell back and died.
On the way back he passed through the province of Idum.
But the Prince was not allowed to live an idle life long.
But who was to lead the men?
These she presented to him as a parting gift.
He looked round for a chance of escape.
There was none.
He was surrounded by fire.
This deer hunt was then only a cunning trick of the enemy!
This is only a brook!
Why do you men want so many boats?
I could jump this if I would.
Not long shall it find pleasure in devouring innocent folk.
I will start out and kill it at once.
I can kill him with my hands.
Here ends the story of Prince Yamato Take of Japan.
How delicious that peach must be!
I must certainly get it and take it home to my old man.
The old woman was delighted.
What is the matter?
Why are you so impatient?
Has anything happened while I have been away?
That is good, said the old man.
It felt even heavier than before.
Did you ever see such a large peach in all your life?
Wherever did you buy it?
I did not buy it, answered the old woman.
I found it in the river where I was washing.
And she told him the whole story.
I am very glad that you have found it.
Let us eat it now, for I am hungry, said the O Fii San.
I am no demon or fairy.
I will tell you the truth.
Heaven has had compassion on you.
On hearing this the old man and his wife were very happy.
I do not know how to thank you enough.
Then let me go away at once!
What do you say?
I will surely come back again, if you let me go now!
Where are you going?
This island is the stronghold of a band of devils.
These devils are very hateful beings.
He thought it best to let the boy go.
I will not hinder you in your determination.
You may go if you wish.
He was full of courage and did not know what fear was.
Parting is always sad.
So it was now.
We expect you back victorious!
But he said Good-by!
I am going now.
Take good care of yourselves while I am away.
And he stepped quickly out of the house.
Momotaro now hurried on his way till it was midday.
Do you know who I am?
What do I hear?
The name of Momotaro?
Are you indeed Momotaro?
I have often heard of your great strength.
Will you please pardon my rudeness?
Are you indeed on your way to invade the Island of Devils?
By the way, I am very very hungry.
Will you give me one of the cakes you are carrying?
Then Momotaro got up and the dog followed.
You are welcome in this part of the country.
Will you allow me to go with you?
Of what use is a monkey like you in battle?
We are on our way to fight the devils!
Wait a moment, dog!
What do you know about it?
I am a monkey living in these hills, replied the monkey.
Nothing will please me more than to follow you!
Yes, sir, replied the monkey.
I admire your courage, said Momotaro.
Here is a piece of one of my fine rice-cakes.
Come along!
So the monkey joined Momotaro.
The dog and the monkey did not get on well together.
By and by they came to a large field.
It was the most beautiful bird Momotaro had ever seen.
It would certainly make a good fighter.
Surrender at once, and I will take you with me.
I am a miserable bird called a pheasant.
Come and join us in our raid on the devils.
Are you going to take this bird with you also?
Why do you ask such an unnecessary question?
I take the bird with me because I wish to!
The first thing necessary in an army is harmony.
Union amongst ourselves is better than any earthly gain.
All the three promised not to quarrel.
Are you afraid of the sea?
It will be far better for me to go alone.
I discharge you all at once!
Please, Momotaro!
We have come thus far!
It is inhuman to leave us here!
We are not at all afraid of the sea, said the monkey again.
Please do take us with you, said the pheasant.
Do please, said the dog.
Momotaro now got a small ship, and they all got on board.
His three followers watched him, waiting for orders.
Fly at once to the castle and engage the demons to fight.
We will follow you.
The pheasant at once obeyed.
Wait till you get a blow from one of our iron bars!
Very angry, indeed, were the devils.
In the meantime, Momotaro had brought his ship to land.
We are captives of the Demon King.
And their tears burst out afresh at this horrible thought.
I will rescue you, said Momotaro.
The chief of the devils at last was the only one left.
I am afraid of you, he said meekly.
I cannot stand against you.
Momotaro laughed.
It is not like you, big devil, to beg for mercy, is it?
In this band there were five knights of great valor.
All the ogres were killed by our chief Raiko at Oeyama!
I may be able to catch an ogre or two by then!
Then his helmet was seized from the back.
Who are you?
He ordered the servant to show her in.
If you did, your deed is highly to be praised!
There is nothing that can be compared to your courage.
Your precaution is very reasonable, said the old woman.
Come, follow me!
What is it like?
I have got my arm back again!
In this way the ogre escaped with his arm.
He tried everything he could think of.
But it was all of no use.
He thought that he must die of fright.
The more he looked, the greater was his astonishment.
All had horns growing on their foreheads.
So he picked himself up and crept back into the tree.
What are these creatures doing?
I will look out, it sounds very amusing.
It made the old man laugh to see their strange antics.
How amusing this is!
I am tired of watching it.
How strange!
I never saw such a skillful dancer before!
He dances admirably!
No, no, answered the big demon.
You must come often and dance for us.
Your skill has given us much pleasure.
The old man thanked him again and promised to do so.
Then will you come again to-morrow, old man?
Certainly, I will, answered the old man.
Whatever you like, said the old man.
I see the old man has a wen on his right cheek.
Now mortal men consider such a wen very fortunate.
He hardly knew for some time where he was.
Here he hid himself and waited for the twilight.
Ah, you are the old man of yesterday, said the demon chief.
Thank you for coming, you must dance for us soon.
We will give you back the pledge you left with us.
You must go away at once.
She was a wonderful woman, and an able ruler.
He was twenty-six feet high.
He was a wizard and a very terrible character indeed.
The general of the front forces must be I!
Do you dare to stop me?
Yes, answered Eiko.
I ought to lead the army.
It is you who should follow me.
Dare you answer me thus?
Take that, and he lunged at him with his lance.
The wizard saw that both his enemies remained unscathed.
They cried to him to help them.
So they presented themselves before the Empress Jokwa.
Now Shikuyu, the Fire King, lived at the South Pole.
To look at he was a giant, and stood thirty feet high.
Surely, thought the Empress, Shikuyu can conquer Kokai.
Eiko was surprised at learning this.
I will certainly kill Kokai.
They were well matched in a hand-to-hand combat.
I will not hurt such a good man.
You cannot deceive me!
He now broke from the fray and tried to escape in earnest.
The wizard found that the battle was against him.
She showered all manner of gifts and honors upon Shikuyu.
Having ascertained this, she set to work at repairs.
Now all was ready.
Neither the sun shone by day nor the moon by night.
But Jokwa had recourse to magic.
Papa was at the office, as usual.
But there was a place in the side of the cover for a key.
Papa said once that some elephant must have killed him.
Some were too large, but most were too small.
All three were dressed in a curious manner.
And you squeezed me all out of shape.
Yet I tender you my regrets.
You might set the house on fire.
Who are you?
We are three bandits, Italian bandits.
Yes, indeed, replied Victor.
We are extremely and tremendously wicked.
Victor cast down his eyes and blushed.
Yet, perhaps you spoke thoughtlessly.
You must consider, miss, that our wickedness has an excuse.
Martha was puzzled and shook her head, thoughtfully.
Then she remembered something.
You are on Prairie avenue, in Chicago.
Uncle Walter sent you here from Italy in this chest.
The bandits seemed greatly bewildered by this announcement.
When he had somewhat recovered himself Victor spoke.
And we had won such fine reputations in Italy!
Are there, then, no bandits in Chicago?
Then what shall we do for a living?
Ah, said Victor, that is a good employment.
The police need to be inspected, especially in Italy.
Some people even become aldermen to earn a living.
The bandits shook their heads sadly.
We are not fitted for such work, said Victor.
Our business is to rob.
Martha tried to think.
Bandits we have always been, and bandits we must remain!
Martha was distressed.
I think they have all been robbed, she objected.
The bandits became interested.
Let us rob the house we are in.
Beni turned threateningly upon the child.
Remain here!
If you stir one step your blood will be on your own head!
Of course not, said Victor.
Confusion to our foes!
Oh, ecstacy!
This America must be a rich place.
Can you tell us of a secret cave?
A hundred and twelve!
Then we are lost!
Are they armed?
Oh, yes, said she.
And cannons!
Suddenly Martha turned from the window.
You are my friends, are you not?
We are devoted!
We adore you!
We would die for you!
Then I will save you, said the girl.
Get back into the chest, she said.
They will soon be here to arrest you.
Beni tumbled in next and packed himself in the back side.
You must squeeze down, she said to them.
Lugui groaned.
I know what takes up the room, said Beni.
The pie, returned Beni.
What sort of a dog?
A good dog.
One that will bark at people and drive them away.
One that has no fleas and is neat in his habits.
One that will obey me when I speak to him.
In short, a good dog, said the wizard.
The wizard watched him thoughtfully.
Why cannot you blow me a dog out of glass?
Only, you must pay for my work.
Certainly, agreed the wizard.
But I have none of that horrid stuff you call money.
You must take some of my wares in exchange.
The glass-blower considered the matter for a moment.
Could you give me something to cure my rheumatism?
What color of glass shall I use?
This will cure your rheumatism, he said.
But the vial is empty!
Will one drop cure my rheumatism?
Most certainly.
That is a marvelous remedy.
Therefore it is especially good for rheumatism.
The glass-blower was grieved at being taken for a peddler.
Nor are the others.
But what is your errand?
Step in, please, and take a seat in the hall.
The young lady did not hesitate an instant.
Bring him here at once!
Where did you get the magic compound that cured me?
How delightful!
You must buy it for me, said the lady.
Then you must steal it for me, she retorted.
Call off your dog, he shouted, in terror.
Give me Pelf 6742!
What is it?
I want to speak with Miss Mydas, said the glass-blower.
What is it?
Have you, indeed?
You must make me another, said the wizard.
Then what shall I do?
I do not know, unless you offer a reward for the dog.
But I have no money, said the wizard.
Yes, indeed.
You will find him in the mansion of Miss Mydas.
And he spent the money in further riotous living.
And so this spendthrift king found it.
Riotous living, of course.
But at last he was at the end of his resources.
All right, replied his majesty, carelessly.
How will you do it?
Marrying me!
Why, I am only ten years old!
Certainly not, declared the counselor.
Let me explain, said the other.
She is too poor, replied the counselor.
True, your majesty.
The boy shuddered.
Have your own way, he said, despairingly.
After which he lost interest in them.
How much am I offered for the coronet of the queen of Quok?
Where is the coronet?
Oh, said the fussy old lady, I see.
Fourteen thousand dollars!
The king began to be anxious.
Wait until to-morrow, after the wedding takes place.
Then you can abuse him as much as you wish.
Well, here I am, said he.
So I see, replied the little king.
But how did you get here?
Yes, I did, acknowledged the king.
Now, then, what do you want?
You are the king, and your word is law.
To be sure, said the majesty.
But I am in great need of money.
Thank you, said the king, gratefully.
Thank you a thousand times!
Such things are easy to me.
Is that all you want?
All I can think of just now, returned the king.
Even so, your majesty.
Nor was the thief anywhere to be seen.
Did you call the police?
The king sighed.
What shall we do now?
That would be wrong, declared the king.
The woman must not be harmed.
Call the woman here.
Where is it?
THE GIRL WHO OWNED A BEAR Mamma had gone down-town to shop.
Soon the door opened and closed again, quietly.
Are you Jane Gladys Brown?
Yes, sir, she answered.
How did you get in?
That is a secret, he said, mysteriously.
This was enough to put the girl on her guard.
What do you want?
Ah!, now we are coming to business, said the man, briskly.
My papa is the best man in the world.
She said nothing.
I think he was quite right, said Jane Gladys.
Oh, you do?
Jane Gladys shivered.
What are you going to do?
How do you spell Gladys?
G-l-a-d-y-s, she replied.
Good-by, my dear.
What amuses you?
Why, the back of you is all white!
Quite likely, he returned, in an annoyed tone.
The artist made a front view of me.
But it makes you look so funny!
This is great fun!
Now I can be a real monkey instead of a picture of one.
How do you know?
Have you ever been one yourself?
The girl was quite bewildered by this time.
And why not?
He should be prosecuted, remarked the clown, gloomily.
Which of us are you going to attack first?
The bear has both claws and teeth.
And I know how to use them, too.
Do you eat animals, also?
She laughed because I had no back.
It will depend on how hungry I am.
The bear stood up and balanced himself on his rear legs.
This is the way I look in the book, he said.
Now watch me eat the little girl.
It would be wrong.
Because I own you.
And you belong, by rights, in the book.
The Grizzly hesitated.
Can any of you read?
I can, said the clown.
Then see if she speaks the truth.
Is her name really in the book?
The clown picked it up and looked at the name.
It is, said he.
The bear sighed.
That author is as disappointing as most authors are.
The fault lies with yourselves, said Jane Gladys, severely.
Really,  began the bear, and then he stopped short.
The door bell rang loudly.
At night the people slept and the cities would be quiet.
He would visit them at night.
Everyone was in bed.
Poor dears!
Fly away, my beauties, and be happy again.
Cheer up, sister, said one.
And if I cannot sell my goods I shall be utterly ruined.
So he set off to find the birds.
Thank you for setting us free.
Popopo was puzzled.
We do not fear men now.
It seems you are necessary to trim the hats properly.
Fashions, said a black bird, solemnly, are made by men.
What have we to do with fashions, anyway?
Answer me, Popopo!
But Popopo was in despair.
So he went home to think what could be done.
The king frowned.
How shall I do that?
Easily enough.
Enchant the types!
Popopo thanked the wise king and followed his advice.
And they are living there yet, I suppose.
He was, indeed, all right for a hippopotamus.
This was no secret to the hippopotamuses.
Gouie lived in one of the little villages of the blacks.
Do you give up?
What will happen if I give up?
The black man scratched his woolly head in perplexity.
It is hard to say, Ippi.
Why, O Jolly One, did you fall into my hole?
I wanted to catch your mother or one of your uncles.
Therefore I fear no danger in facing him.
I will go with you.
It had lived since the world began.
The mother hippopotamus groaned aloud.
Keo laughed.
Lift your right paw, commanded Glinkomok.
Your strength is greater than that of ten elephants.
Your foot is so swift that you can distance the wind.
Your wit is sharper than the bulthorn.
And Keo ran.
I took them far away, and they remained where I left them.
Keo laughed his jolly guk-uk-uk-uk!
Save me, and I will release you from slavery!
That is not enough, laughed Keo.
I will serve you all my life!
Swear it by the bones of your grandfather!
And Gouie swore it by the bones of his grandfather.
By day he was proud and swaggering.
His conscience troubled him.
What shall I do?
Are you willing to pay for such accomplishments?
Certainly, answered Claribel, jingling her purse.
Here are some magic bonbons.
How delightful!
How stupid of me to forget it, she returned.
Are you sure you have made them strong enough?
Someone must have mislaid it.
That was the prelude, however.
Then he peeped into the parlor to see who was playing.
Great Caesar!
Our child seems to be in a trance.
Did you ever hear such superb music?
Beats Blind Tom all hollow!
Higher, I say!
The senator shuddered.
Arrest him!
This was unexpected.
Let go, I say!
About his body was thrown a loose robe of fine white linen.
Well, what are you staring at?
No, said Jim, stupidly.
How did I happen to catch you?
Why should I?
Jim laughed.
Indeed I do, replied Father Time, with a sigh.
As soon as I let you go Time will fly again.
Where are your wings?
That is a story cooked up by some one who never saw me.
As a matter of fact, I move rather slowly.
I see, you take your time, remarked the boy.
What do you use that scythe for?
To mow down the people, said the ancient one.
Every time I swing my scythe some one dies.
Some folks will live this much longer.
You may as well untie me at once.
No, said Jim, with a determined air.
When he reached the road his eye fell on a strange tableau.
Not yet, replied the boy.
He mounted the horse again and rode up the street.
It takes Time to spoil meat, answered the old man.
This struck Jim as being queer, but true.
It seems Time meddles with everything, said he.
In the front room sat his aunt, reading her Bible.
She was just turning a page when Time stopped.
In the dining-room was his uncle, finishing his luncheon.
You can do anything you wish with Time now.
No one will ever be able to catch up with me again.
Each life has its allotted span, said the old man.
I forgot your scythe, said Jim, thoughtfully.
He certainly did not like the boys and the boys knew it.
Near by was the schoolhouse.
Signed, Prof. Sharpe.
Jim thought this opportunity was too good to lose.
What about it?
I was a boy myself, long ago, when the world was new.
And the grocer ran out of his door and yelled Fire!
Thank you so much for saving me!
But, tell me, why do you come each day to the brook?
Then dig a well and put a pump in it, replied the beetle.
She shook her head.
I must go now.
Do not forget.
Dig a well.
But still there was no water.
Did he put the pump in the well?
No, she answered.
Suddenly the woman spoke.
And I will give the pastor one of the gold pieces.
We can pump more, said the woman.
Where else could real money come from?
Then you think the beetle stole the money?
Perhaps it really is fairy gold, suggested the man.
To give them fairy gold would be to rob them.
What, then, shall we do?
Go home and wait until to-morrow.
It is real money, after all!
Are you happy now?
But we do want it!
That is, she added, if it is honestly come by.
That is true, was the answer.
But, alas for their new-born pride!
The well is dry!
But what are we to do now?
What did you do before I gave you the money?
The ryl laughed again and flew away.
The wax lady was in no hurry.
She inherited patience from her previous existence.
Mine, did you say?
What are they for?
All the news, you know.
She shook her head and glanced at a paper.
It looks all speckled and mixed up, she said.
Ever ben to school?
The boy gave her an indignant look.
I wonder that he means, thought the poor lady.
Am I really different in some way from all the others?
She stared at him stupidly, trying to think what he meant.
Come, come!
Her dress was badly torn and soiled.
What does it mean to be killed?
The wax lady did not reply.
Can a dummy talk?
Can a dummy walk?
Can a dummy live?
He also hinted that they had been guilty of intemperance.
I want a dozen detectives, at once, inspector!
Is everybody going crazy at the same time?
How could a wax dummy run away?
He was too frightened.
The inspector thought for a moment.
Mr. Floman sighed bitterly.
But when they entered No.
I knew all the time the thing was a fake.
In the boat were men.
That was all he remembered for a time.
The king is a great magician, for even men cannot kill him.
But he suffers for lack of covering.
This idea pleased the gulls.
Have courage, then, and live!
Thus he added to his store of wisdom.
Who ever before heard of a feathered polar bear?
Then the king gave way to wrath.
Then who shall take his place?
Only the strongest is fit to rule our race.
And I will be King of the Polar Bears.
I wear feathers because it pleases me, growled the king.
Am I not a great magician?
I shall conquer, he said, proudly.
Let them go!
And the hundred gulls were soon flying rapidly southward.
Then their search began.
The gulls were brave, and cunning, and wise.
They were late.
Meanwhile the bird-bear was preparing for his fight.
He sharpened his claws in the small crevasses of the ice.
Among them was Woof, strong and confident of his success.
Come nearer, bird-bear!
Come nearer, that I may pluck your plumage!
The defiance filled the king with rage.
And behold!
But you are my prisoner, said the mandarin.
I expect that, replied the butterfly, with a sigh.
Yet you like to live, do you not?
I do not seek death.
How can a butterfly serve a man?
Usually they cannot, was the reply.
But I have a book of magic which teaches me strange things.
Do you promise?
I can easily do so by means of my magic.
Of course I will obey you, said the butterfly, carelessly.
Then, listen!
You know children, do you not?, boys and girls?
Yes, I know them.
Therefore, they are your enemies and mine!
Nevertheless, I care!
I, at least, will have my revenge.
But it did not intend to try.
But I rather like children myself and shall not harm them.
I did, replied the butterfly, calmly.
The butterfly gave a sigh of relief.
At sundown it returned to its master.
Have you changed two of them into pigs?
I have, replied the butterfly.
Those are the ones who torment me the most!
Change every newboy you meet into a pig!
The butterfly did not reply.
Soon after a gentleman came into the room for his laundry.
When night came it slept in a rose bush.
